WARNING 


Wilson describes himself as a ‘guerrilla ontologist,' signifying 
his intent to attack language and knowledge the way terrorists 
attack their targets: to jump out from the shadows for an unpro- 
voked attack, then slink back and hide behind a hearty belly 
laugh. 

— Robert Sheaffer, The Skeptical Inquirer 



CHAPTER ONE 

THE THINKER & 
THE PROVER 


All that we are is the result of all that we have thought. It is 
founded on thought. It is based on thought. 

— Buddha, The Dhammapada 



William James, father of American psychology, tells of meeting 
an old lady who told him the Earth rested on the back of a huge 
turtle. 

"But, my deal - lady," Professor James asked, as politely as 
possible, "what holds up the turtle?" 

"Ah," she said, "that's easy. He is standing on the back of 
another turtle." 

"Oh, I see," said Professor James, still being polite. "But 
would you be so good as to tell me what holds up the second 
turtle?" 

"It's no use. Professor," said the old lady, realizing he was 
trying to lead her into a logical trap. "It's turtles-turtles-turtles, 
all the way!" 

Don't be too quick to laugh at this little old lady. All human 
minds work on fundamentally similar principles. Her universe 
was a little bit weirder than most but it was built up on the same 
mental principles as every other universe people have believed 
in. 

As Dr. Leonard Orr has noted, the human mind behaves as if 
it were divided into two parts, the Thinker and the Prover. 

The Thinker can think about virtually anything. History 
shows that it can think the earth is suspended on the backs of 
infinite turtles or that the Earth is hollow, or that the Earth is 
floating in space 4 , 1 comparative religion and philosophy show 
that the Thinker can regard itself as mortal, as immortal, as both 
mortal and immortal (the reincarnation model) or even as non- 
existent (Buddhism). It can think itself into living in a Christian 
universe, a Marxist universe, a scientific-relativistic universe, or 
a Nazi universe — among many possibilities. 

As psychiatrists and psychologists have often observed (much 
to the chagrin of their medical colleagues), the Thinker can think 
itself sick, and can even think itself well again. 

The Prover is a much simpler mechanism. It operates on one 
law only: Whatever the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves. 

To cite a notorious example which unleashed incredible 
horrors earlier in this century, if the Thinker thinks that all Jews 
are rich, the Prover will prove it. It will find evidence that the 

1 Millions of people believe that (including the present author). 


25 



2(5 


Prometheus Rising 


poorest Jew in the most run-down ghetto has hidden money 
somewhere. Similarly, Feminists are able to believe that all men, 
including the starving wretches who live and sleep on the streets, 
are exploiting all women, including the Queen of England. 

If the Thinker thinks that the sun moves around the earth, the 
Prover will obligingly organize all perceptions to fit that thought; 
if the Thinker changes its mind and decides the earth moves 
around the sun, the Prover will reorganize the evidence. 

If the Thinker thinks "holy water" from Lourdes will cure its 
lumbago, the Prover will skillfully orchestrate all signals from 
the glands, muscles, organs etc. until they have organized them- 
selves into good health again 

Of course, it is fairly easy to see that other people's minds 
operate this way; it is comparatively much harder to become 
aware that one’s own mind is working that way also. 

It is believed, for instance, that some men are more 
"objective" than others. (One seldom hears this about women...) 
Businessmen are allegedly hard-nosed, pragmatic and "objec- 
tive" in this sense. A brief examination of the dingbat politics 
most businessmen endorse will quickly correct that impression. 

Scientists, however, are still believed to be objective. No 
study of the lives of the great scientists will confirm this. They 
were as passionate, and hence as prejudiced, as any assembly of 
great painters or great musicians. It was not just the Church but 
also the established astronomers of the time who condemned 
Galileo. The majority of physicists rejected Einstein's Special 
Relativity Theory in 1905. Einstein himself would not accept 
anything in quantum theory after 1920 no matter how many 
experiments supported it. Edison's commitment to direct current 
(DC) electrical generators led him to insist alternating current 
(AC) generators were unsafe for years after their safety had been 
proven to everyone else. 1 


Edison's pigheadedness on this matter was partly the result of his 
jealousy against Nikola Tesla, inventor of AC generators. Tesla, on 
the other hand, refused the Nobel Prize when it was offered to him 
and Edison/cu«?/y because he refused to appear on the same platform 
with Edison. Both of these geniuses were only capable of "objec- 
tivity" and science in certain limited laboratory conditions. If you 



Prometheus Rising 


27 


Science achieves, or approximates, objectivity not because the 
individual scientist is immune from the psychological laws that 
govern the rest of us, but because scientific method — a group 
creation — eventually overrides individual prejudices, in the long 
run. 

To take a notorious example from the 1 960s, there was a point 
when three research groups had "proven" that LSD causes 
chromosome damage, while three other groups had "proven" that 
LSD has no effect on the chromosomes. In each case, the Prover 
had proved what the Thinker thought. Right now, there are, in 
physics, 7 experiments that confirm a very controversial concept 
known as Bell's Theorem, and two experiments that refute Bell's 
Theorem. In the area of extra-sensory perception, the results are 
uniform after more than a century: everybody who sets out to 
prove that ESP exists succeeds, and everybody who sets out to 
prove that ESP does not exist also succeeds. 

"Truth" or relative truth emerges only after decades of exper- 
iments by thousands of groups all over the world. 



think you have a higher "objectivity quotient" than either of them, 
why haven't you been nominated for a Nobel prize? 


28 


Prometheus Rising 


In the long run, we are hopefully approximating closer and 
closer to "objective Truth" over the centuries. 

In the short run, Orr's law always holds: 

Whatever the Thinker thinks, the Prover will prove . 1 

And if the Thinker thinks passionately enough, the Prover will 
prove the thought so conclusively that you will never talk a 
person out of such a belief, even if it is something as remarkable 
as the notion that there is a gaseous vertebrate of astronomical 
heft ("GOD") who will spend all eternity torturing people who 
do not believe in his religion. 

EXERCIZES 

Sad as it is to say, you never understand anything by merely 
reading a book about it. That's why every science course 
includes laboratory experiments, and why every consciousness- 
liberation movement demands practice of yogas, meditations, 
confrontation techniques, etc. in which the ideas are tested in the 
laboratory of your own nervous system. 

The reader will absolutely not understand this book unless he 
or she does the exercizes given at the end of each chapter. 

To explore the Thinker and the Prover, try the following: 

1. Visualize a quarter vividly, and imagine vividly that you are 
going to find the quarter on the street. Then, look for the quarter 
every time you take a walk, meanwhile continuing to visualize it. 
See how long it takes you to find the quarter. 

2. Explain the above experiment by the hypothesis of "selec- 
tive attention” — that is, believe there are lots of lost quarters 
everywhere and you were bound to find one by continually look- 
ing. Go looking for a second quarter. 

3. Explain the experiment by the alternative "mystical" 
hypothesis that "mind controls everything." Believe that you 
made the quarter manifest in this universe. Go looking for a 
second quarter. 


If the reader is a scientist, be not alarmed. This refers not to you but 
only to those benighted fools in the opposite camp who refuse to rec- 
ognize that your theory is the only reasonable one. Of course. 



Prometheus Rising 


29 


4. Compare the time it takes to find the second quarter using 
the first hypothesis (attention) with the time it takes using the 
second hypothesis (mind-over-matter). 

5. With your own ingenuity, invent similar experiments and 
each time compare the two theories — “selective attention" 
(coincidence) vs. "mind controls everything" (psychokinesis). 

6. Avoid coming to any strong conclusions prematurely. At 
the end of a month, re-read this chapter, think it over again, and 
still postpone coming to any dogmatic conclusion. Believe it 
possible that you do not know everything yet, and that you might 
have something still to learn. 

7. Convince yourself 1 (if you are not already convinced) that 
you are ugly, unattractive and dull. Go to a party in that frame of 
mind. Observe how people treat you. 

8. Convince yourself (if you are not already convinced) that 
you are handsome, irresistible and witty. Go to a party in that 
frame of mind. Observe how people treat you. 

9. This is the hardest of all exercizes and comes in two parts. 
First, observe closely and dispassionately two dear friends and 
two relative strangers. Try to figure out what their Thinkers 
think, and how their Provers methodically set about proving it. 
Second, apply the same exercize to yourself. 

If you think you have learned the lessons of these exercizes in 
less than six months, you haven't really been working at them. 
With real work, in six months you should be just beginning to 
realize how little you know about everything. 

10. Believe it possible that you can float off the ground and 
fly by merely willing it. See what happens. 

If this exercize proves as disappointing to you as it has to me, 
try number 1 1 below, which is never disappointing. 

1 1. Believe that you can exceed all your previous ambitions 
and hopes in all areas of your life. 


"Believe" or "convince yourself mean to do what an actor does: 
pretend until the pretense begins to feel real. Or, as Jazz musicians 
say: "Fake it until you make it." 



Prometheus Rising 



ALL MODELS ARE SUBJECT TO REVISION AS THIS BOOK 
GOES ALONG. THEY ARE ALSO SUBJECT TO REVISION 
AFTER THE BOOK IS FINISHED — BY THE AUTHOR OR BY 
THE READER 


Prometheus Rising 



Tentative Model #1: The perceived universe is a mixture of the 
"real universe" and our own “Thinker” — proving its pet beliefs. 



CHAPTER TWO 


HARDWARE & 
SOFTWARE: 

THE BRAIN & ITS 
PROGRAMS 


We, as a species, exist in a world in which exist a myriad of data 
points. 1 Upon these matrices of points we superimpose a structure 2 
and the world makes sense to us. The pattern of the structure 
originates within our biological and sociological properties. 3 

— Persinger and Lafreniere, 
Space-Time Transients and Unusual Events 


1 In our terminology, these data points are events or actions, i.e. verbs, 
not nouns. 

2 In our terminology, models or maps, static things; nouns not verbs. 

3 In our terminology, brain hardware and software. 


33 




We will, throughout this book, consider the human brain a kind 
of bio-computer — an electro-colloidal computer, as distinct from 
the electronic or solid-state computers which exist outside our 
heads. 

Please note carefully and long remember that we have not 
said that the human brain is a computer. The Aristotelian idea 
that to understand something you must know what it is has been 
abandoned in one science after another, for the pragmatic reason 
that the simple word "is" introduces so many metaphysical 
assumptions that we can argue forever about them. In the most 
advanced sciences, such as mathematical physics, nobody talks 
about what anything is anymore. They talk about what model (or 
map) can best be used to understand whatever we are investi- 
gating. 

In general, this scientific habit of avoiding "is" can be prof- 
itably extended to all areas of thought. Thus, when you read 
anywhere that A is B, it will clarify matters if you translate this 
as "A can be considered as, or modeled by, B." 

When we say A is B, we are saying that A is only what it 
appears within our field of study or our area of specialization. 
This is saying too much. When we say A can be considered as B, 
or modeled by B, we are saying exactly as much as we have a 
right to say, and no more. 

We therefore say that the brain can be considered as a com- 
puter; but we do not say it is a computer. 

The brain appeal's to be made up of matter in electro-colloidal 
suspension (protoplasm). 

Colloids are pulled together, toward a condition of gel, by 
their surface tensions. This is because surface tensions pull all 
glue-like substances together. 

Colloids are also, conversely, pushed apart, toward a condi- 
tion of sol, by their electrical charges. This is because their elec- 
trical charges are similar, and similar electrical charges always 
repel each other. 

In the equilibrium between gel and sol, the colloidal suspen- 
sion maintains its continuity and life continues. Move the sus- 
pension too far toward gel, or too far toward sol, and life ends. 

Any chemical that gets into the brain, changes the gel-sol 
balance, and "consciousness" is accordingly influenced. Thus, 
potatoes are, like LSD, “psychedelic”-— in a milder way. The 


35 



Prometheus Rising 


changes in consciousness when one moves from a vegetarian diet 
to an omnivorous diet, or vice versa, are also "psychedelic." 

Since "What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves," all of our 
ideas are psychedelic. Even without experimenting with diet or 
drugs, whatever you think you should see, you will see — unless 
it is physically impossible in this universe. 



THE BRAIN IS NOT A COMPUTER 

BUT THE BRAIN CAN BE MODELED BY A COMPUTER 


PLEASURE PAIN 

\ / 

PROGRAMS RUNNING 


(INPUT) 


A 


APPROACH 


FLEE 


(OUTPUT) 


All experience is a muddle, until we make a model to explain it. The 
model can clarify the muddles, but the model is never the muddle 
itself. "The map is not the territory"; the menu does not taste like 
the meal. 





Prometheus Rising 


37 

Every computer consists of two aspects, known as hardware 
and software. (Software here includes information). 

The hardware in a solid-state computer is concrete and local- 
ized, consisting of central processing unit, display, keyboard, 
external disk drive, CD-ROM, floppies, etc. — all the parts you 
can drag into Radio Shack for repair if the computer is malfunc- 
tioning. 

The software consists of programs that can exist in many 
forms, including the totally abstract. A program can be "in" the 
computer in the sense that it is recorded in the CPU or on a disk 
which is hitched up to the computer. A program can also exist on 
a piece of paper, if I invented it myself, or in a manual, if it is a 
standard program; in these cases, it is not "in" the computer but 
can be put "in" at any time. But a program can be even more 
tenuous than that; it can exist only in my head, if I have never 
written it down, or if I have used it once and erased it. 

The hardware is more "real" than the software in that you can 
always locate it in space-time — if it’s not in the bedroom, some- 
body must have moved it to the study, etc. On the other hand, the 
software is more "real" in the sense that you can smash the 
hardware back to dust ("kill" the computer) and the software still 
exists, and can "materialize" or "manifest" again in a different 
computer. 

(Any speculations about reincarnation at this point are the 
responsibility of the reader, not of the author.) 




V 


Sc,f, 





In speaking of the human brain as an electro-colloidal 
biocomputer, we all know where the hardware is: it is inside the 
human skull. The software, however, seems to be anywhere and 



Prometheus Rising 


everywhere. For instance, the software "in" my brain also exists 
outside my brain in such forms as, say, a book 1 read twenty 
years ago, which was an English translation of various signals 
transmitted by Plato 2400 years ago. Other parts of my software 
are made up of the software of Confucius, James Joyce, my 
second-grade teacher, the Three Stooges, Beethoven, my mother 
and father, Richard Nixon, my various dogs and cats, Dr. Carl 
Sagan, and anybody and (to some extent) any-thing that has ever 
impacted upon my brain. This may sound strange, but that's the 
way software (or information) functions. 

Of course, if consciousness consisted of nothing but this 
undifferentiated tapioca of timeless, spaceless software, we 
would have no individuality, no center, no Self. 

We want to know, then, how out of this universal software 
ocean a specific person emerges. 

What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves. 

Because the human brain, like other animal brains, acts as an 
electro-colloidal computer, not a solid-state computer, it follows 
the same laws as other animal brains. That is, the programs get 
into the brain, as electro-chemical bonds, in discrete quantum 
stages. 

Each set of programs consists of four basic parts: 

1 . Genetic Imperatives. Totally hard-wired programs or 
"instincts." 

2. Imprints. These are more-or-less hard wired programs 
which the brain is genetically designed to accept only at certain 
points in its development. These points are known, in ethology, 
as times of imprint vulnerability. 

3. Conditioning. These are programs built onto the imprints. 
They are looser and fairly easy to change with counter-condi- 
tioning. 

4. Learning. This is even looser and "softer" than condition- 
ing. 

In general, the primordial imprint can always over-rule any 
subsequent conditioning or learning. An imprint is a species of 
software that has become built-in hardware, being impressed on 
the tender neurons when they are peculiarly open and vulnerable. 

Imprints (software frozen into hardware) are the non-nego- 
tiable aspects of our individuality. Out of the infinity of possible 



Prometheus Rising 


39 


programs existing as potential software, the imprint establishes 
the limits, parameters, perimeters within which all subsequent 
conditioning and learning occurs. 

YOUR HARDWARE IS LOCALIZED: 

BRAIN CELLS RIGHT HERE, RIGHT NOW. 



YOUR SOFTWARE IS NON-LOCAL: 
POINT-EVENTS EVERYWHERE, EVERYWHEN. 

Before the first imprint, the consciousness of the infant is 
"formless and void” — like the universe at the beginning of 
Genesis, or the descriptions of unconditioned ("enlightened" i.e., 
exploded) consciousness in the mystic traditions. As soon as the 
first imprint is made, structure emerges out of the creative void. 
The growing mind, alas, becomes trapped within this structure. It 
identifies with the structure; in a sense, it becomes the structure. 

This entire process is analyzed in G. Spencer Brown's Laws 
of Form; and Brown was writing about the foundations of math- 
ematics and logic. But every sensitive reader knows that Brown 
is also talking about a process we have all passed through in 
creating, out of an infinite ocean of signals, those particular 
constructs we call "myself and "my world." Not surprisingly, 



40 


Prometheus Rising 


many acid-heads have said that Brown's math is the best descrip- 
tion ever written of an LSD trip. 

Each successive imprint complicates the software which 
programs our experience and which we experience as “reality. ” 

Conditioning and learning build further networks onto this 
bedrock of imprinted software. The total structure of this brain- 
circuitry makes up our map of the world. It is what our Thinker 
thinks, and our Prover mechanically fits all incoming signals to 
the limitations of this map. 

Following Dr. Timothy Leary (with a few modifications) we 
shall divide this brain hardware into eight circuits for conven- 
ience. ("For convenience" means that this is the best map I know 
at present. I assume it will be replaced by a better map within 10 
or 15 years; and in any case, the map is not the territory.) 

Four of the circuits are "antique" and conservative, they exist 
in everybody (except feral children). 

1. The Oral Bio-Survival Circuit. This is imprinted by the 
mother or the first mothering object and conditioned by 
subsequent nourishment or threat. It is primarily concerned with 
sucking, feeding, cuddling, and body security. It retreats 
mechanically from the noxious or predatory — or from anything 
associated (by imprinting or conditioning) with the noxious or 
predatory. 

2. The Anal Emotional-Territorial Circuit. This is imprinted 
in the "Toddling" stage when the infant rises up, walks about and 
begins to struggle for power within the family structure. This 
mostly mammalian circuit processes territorial rules, emotional 
games, or cons, pecking order and rituals of domination or 
submission. 

3. The Time-Binding Semantic Circuit. This is imprinted and 
conditioned by human artifacts and symbol systems. It "handles" 
and "packages" the environment, classifying everything accord- 
ing to the local reality tunnel. Invention, calculation, prediction 
and transmitting signals across generations are its functions. 

4. The “Moral“Socio-Sexual Circuit. This is imprinted by the 
first orgasm-mating experiences at puberty and is conditioned by 
tribal taboos. It processes sexual pleasure, local definitions of 
"right" and "wrong," reproduction, adult-parental personality 
(sex role) and nurture of the young. 



Prometheus Rising 


41 


The development of these circuits as the brain evolved 
through evolution, and as each domesticated primate (human) 
brain recapitulates evolution in growing from infancy to adult- 
hood, makes possible gene-pool survival, mammalian sociobiol- 
ogy (pecking order, or politics) and transmission of culture. 

The second group of four brain circuits is much newer, and 
each circuit exists at present only in minorities. Where the 
antique circuits recapitulate evolution-to-the-present, these futur- 
istic circuits precapitulate our future evolution. 

5. The Holistic Neurosomcitic Circuit. This is imprinted by 
ecstatic experience, via biological or chemical yogas. It process- 
es neurosomatic ("mind-body") feedback loops, somatic-sensory 
bliss, feeling "high," "faith-healing," etc. Christian Science, NLP 
and holistic medicine consist of tricks or gimmicks to get this 
circuit into action at least temporarily; Tantra yoga is concerned 
with shifting consciousness entirely into this circuit. 

6. The Collective Neurogenetic Circuit. This is imprinted by 
advanced yogas (bio-chemical - electrical stresses). It processes 
DNA-RNA-brain feedback systems and is "collective" in that it 
contains and has access to the whole evolutionary "script," past 
and future. Experience of this circuit is numinous, "mystical," 
mind-shattering; here dwell the archetypes of Jung's Collective 
Unconscious — Gods, Goddesses, Demons, Hairy Dwarfs and 
other personifications of the DNA programs (instincts) that 
govern us. 

7. The Meta-programming Circuit. This is imprinted by very 
advanced yogas. It consists, in modern terms, of cybernetic con- 
sciousness, reprogramming and reimprinting all other circuits, 
even reprogramming itself, making possible conscious choice 
between alternative universes or reality tunnels. 

8. The Non-Local Quantum Circuit. This is imprinted by 
Shock, by "near-death" or "clinical death" experience, by 
OOBEs (out-of-body-experiences), by trans-time perceptions 
(“precognition”), by trans-space visions (ESP), etc. It tunes the 
brain into the non-local quantum communication system sug- 
gested by physicists such as Bohm, Walker, Sarfatti, Bell, etc. 

These circuits will be explained in detail as we proceed. 



42 


Prometheus Rising 


EXERCIZES 

1 . If you don't already have a computer, run out and buy one. 
Then re-read this chapter. 

2. To understand hardware and software are (as applied to the 
human brain) perform the following meditation. 

Sit in a room where you will not be disturbed for a half hour 
and begin thinking, "I am sitting in this room doing this exercize 
because. . .“ and list as many of the "causes" as you can think of. 

For instance, you are doing this exercize because, obviously, 
you read about it in this book. Why did you buy this book? Did 
somebody recommend it? How did that person come into your 
life? If you just picked the book up in a store, why did you 
happen to be in just that store on just that day? 

Why do you read books of this sort — on psychology, con- 
sciousness, evolution etc.? How did you get interested in those 
fields? Who turned you on, and how long ago? What factors in 
your childhood inclined you to be interested in these subjects 
later? 

Why are you doing this exercize in this room and not else- 
where? Why did you buy or rent this house or apartment? Why 
are you in this city and not another? Why on this continent and 
not another? 

Why are you here at all — that is, how did your parents meet? 
Did they consciously decide to have a child, do you happen to 
know, or were you an accident? What cities were they born in? If 
in different cities, why did they move in space-time so that their 
paths would intersect? 

Why is this planet capable of supporting life, and why did it 
produce the kind of life that would dream up an exercize of this 
sort? 

Repeat this exercize a few days later, trying to ask and answer 
fifty questions you didn't think of the first time. (Note that you 
cannot ever ask all possible questions.) 

Avoid all metaphysical speculations (e.g., karma, reincarna- 
tion, "destiny" etc.). The point of the exercize will be mind- 
blowing enough without introducing "occult" theories, and it will 
be more startling if you carefully avoid such overtly "mystical" 
speculations. 



Prometheus Rising 


43 


4. Pick up any household item — a spoon, a pen, a cup etc. 
Perform the same exercize as above — why is it here? Who 
invented it, if you can find out? How did the invention get to this 
continent? Who manufactured it? Why did they manufacture that 
instead of bird cages? Why did they become manufacturers 
instead of musicians? Why did you buy it? Why did you pick 
that object, of all the objects in your house, for this meditation? 

ANSWER QUICKLY NOW 

ARE YOU YOUR HARDWARE, 

OR YOUR SOFTWARE? 

OR BOTH? 




CHAPTER THREE 


THE ORAL BIO-SURVIVAL 
CIRCUIT 


Genes, like Leibnitz's monads, have no windows; the higher 
properties of life are emergent. 

— Edward Wilson, Sociobiology 



45 




Few of our ancestors were perfect ladies or gentlemen; the 
majority of them were not even mammals. 

Any multi-cellular organism must, if it is to survive, contain a 
hard-wired bio-survival circuit, which very simply programs an 
either-or choice: GO FORWARD to the nourishing, the protec- 
tive, or GO BACK, away from the threatening, the predatory. 

Any mammal hooks the bio-survival circuit to the first 
imprinted bio-survival object: the teat. Bio-survival and orality 
are deeply blended in all mammals, including domesticated 
primates (humans). This is why, despite the Cancer Terror, an 
estimated 30,000,000 Americans still smoke cigarettes... Others 
chew gum (spearmint, juicy fruit, even sugar-free: something for 
every taste), bite their fingernails, gnaw their knuckles, scrunch 
pencil stubs, eat more than they need (Potato chips, anyone? a 
Mars bar maybe? pretzels, peanuts, cashews, do you want the 
cheese and crackers with your beer, Mac? And do try the 
canapes, Mrs. Miller). Some chew their lips, gobble tranks and 
uppers, even munch their mustaches. What goes on in the 
bedroom is known to the Kinsey Institute and anyone who has 
seen a porn film. 

How important is this oral imprinting? We read of a baby 
giraffe whose mother was accidentally killed by a jeep immedi- 
ately after birth. The neonate, following hard-wired genetic 
programs, "imprinted" the first object that roughly fit the giraffe 
archetype — the jeep itself. He followed the machine around, 
vocalized to it, attempted to suckle from it, and, when adult, tried 
to mate with it. 

Similarly, Konrad Lorenz tells of a gosling who accidentally 
imprinted a ping-pong ball and spent his adult life, indifferent to 
female geese, attempting to sexually mount ping-pong balls. 

As Charles Darwin noted: 

In our maturer years, when an object of vision is presented to 
us which bears any similitude to the form of the female 
bosom... we feel a general glow of delight which seems to 
influence all of our senses. . . 

The ancients pictured the great mother goddess Diana of 
Ephesus with literally dozens of breasts and St. Paul reports 
hearing her worshippers chanting rapturously "Great is Diana!" 
There is virtually no great artist who has not left us a portrait, or 
many portraits, of the nude female form, especially the breasts; 


47 



48 


Prometheus Rising 


and even in non-human scenes, curves are introduced wherever 
possible. Architects break the Euclidean straight line to introduce 
such curves at the slightest pretext — arches, Moorish domes, etc. 
The curves of the suspension bridge are necessitated by 
Newton's laws ("Gravity's rainbow," in Pynchon's phrase) but, 
still, these double catenary curves are esthetically pleasing for 
the reasons Darwin suggests. As for music — where did we first 
hear it, who sang or hummed to us, and against what part of her 
body were we held? 

Mountain climbers are reduced, like Mallory, to saying 
"Because it's there," when trying to explain their compulsion to 
ascend those conic peaks. 

Our eating utensils (oral gratification tools) tend to be 
rounded or curved. Square plates or saucers look "campy" or 
strange. 

UFOs come in a variety of shapes, but the most popular are 
the oval and conic. 

Freudians suggest that opiate addiction is an attempt to return 
to the womb. In keeping with our theory, it is more likely that 
opium and its derivatives return us to the "safe space" on the bio- 
survival circuit, the warm, snug place of bio-security; opiates 
may trigger neuro-transmitters 1 characteristic of breast-feeding. 

In summary: the bio-survival circuit is DNA-programmed to 
seek a comfort-safety zone around a mothering organism. If a 
mother isn't present, the closet substitute in the environment will 
be imprinted. For the orphan giraffe, a four-wheeled jeep was 
chosen to stand in for the. four-legged mother. The gosling who 
could not find the round, white body of the mother-goose fixated 
a round, white ping-pong ball. 

The "wiring" of this circuit, in primitive form, occurred in the 
first organisms, between three and four billion years ago. In the 
modern human, this structure remains in the brain stem and in 
the autonomic ( "involuntary “)ner\’ous system, where it is inter- 
connected with the endocrine and other life-support systems. 
This is why disturbances on this circuit act "all over the body at 

* Neuro-transmitters are chemicals which alter the electro-colloidal 
balance of the brain and hence change the perceptual field. Brain- 
change agents. 



Prometheus Rising 


49 


once" and generally take the form of physical symptoms rather 
than "mental" symptoms and usually get referred to the M.D. 
instead of the psychiatrist. 

It must be stressed that we are still in a primitive stage of 
evolution and conditions on this planet are quite brutal. Radical 
pediatricians insist, with good evidence, that childbirth by 
conventional means in a conventional hospital is almost always 
traumatic for the newborn — creates a bad imprint, in our lan- 
guage. Our child-rearing methods are far from ideal also, adding 
bad conditioning on top of bad imprinting. And the general 
violence of our societies to date— including wars, revolutions, 
civil wars and the "undeclared civil war" of the predatory crimi- 
nal class in every "civilized" nation— keeps the first circuit of 
most people in an emergency state far too much of the time. 

In 1968, a U.S. Public Health survey showed that 85% of the 
population had one or more symptoms that we would call bad 
first-circuit imprinting or conditioning. These symptoms 
included dizzy spells, heart palpitations, wet palms and frequent 
nightmares. 

This means that 85 out of the next 100 people you meet 
should be regarded as, more or less, "the Walking Wounded." 

This is the first level of meaning in our brutal, cynical 
proposition that most people are almost as mechanical as sci-fi 
robots. A man or woman entering a new situation with the anxi- 
ety chemicals 1 of a frightened infant coursing through the brain 
stem is not going to be able to observe , judge or decide anything 
very accurately. 

And this is why Gurdjieff said, in his own jargon, that people 
are asleep and having nightmares. 

"FAIRNESS? DECENCY? HOW CAN YOU EXPECT 
FAIRNESS OR DECENCY ON A PLANET OF SLEEPING 
PEOPLE?" 

— G.I. Gurdjieff 

This was the viewpoint of the earliest Christians, later con- 
demned as heretics (Gnostics) by the Roman bureaucrats. The 

We especially refer to adrenaline and adrenalutin, which signal the 
whole organism to prepare to fight or flee. 



50 


Prometheus Rising 


Gospel of Truth, first century, says bluntly that history is a 
nightmare: 

... as if (mankind) were sunk in sleep and found themselves in 
disturbing dreams. Either (there is) a place to which they are 
fleeing... or they are involved in striking blows, or they are 
receiving blows themselves... sometimes it is as if people were 
murdering them... or they themselves are killing their 
neighbors... 

To these first Christians, as to the Buddhists, awakening liter- 
ally meant coming out of this nightmare of terrifying fantasies. 
In our terminology, it means correcting the editing that cause us 
to behave and perceive like very badly (inappropriately) wired 
robots and suddenly seeing the unedited world. 

It must be emphasized that this circuit, being the oldest in 
evolutionary development, is the most mechanical, and the most 
rapid. One is not conscious of time at all on the bio-survival 
circuit. Observe the speed of your dog's reaction at the first 
sound of an intruder: the threatening bark, and the movement of 
the whole body to alert status, is automatic. Then the dog starts 
taking in other cues, to determine how this particular intruder 
should be treated. 

As Robert Ardrey reports the remarks of primatologist Ray 
Carpenter, to understand this part of your brain. . . 

Imagine that you are a monkey and you're running along a 
path past a rock and unexpectedly meet face to face another 
animal. Now, before you know whether to attack it, to flee it, 
or to ignore it, you must make a series of decisions. Is it 
monkey or non-monkey? If non-monkey, is it pro-monkey or 
anti-monkey? If monkey, is it male or female? If female, is she 
interested? If male, is it adult or juvenile? If adult, is it of my 
group or some other?... You have about one fifth of a second 
to make all these decisions, or you could be attacked. 

The bio-survival program first attaches to the safe space 
around the mother (oral imprint), and then with age moves 
further and further out, exploring what is safe and what is not. 
Without hard-wired genetic programs (i.e., automatic programs) 
this second stage would be impossible, and no mammal would 
ever leave the teat. The hard-wired programs act automatically 



Prometheus Rising 

(UNCONSCIOUSLY) because if you had to stop and think out 
each situation, you would be eaten by the first predator. 

Of course, the imprint is made by chance — by the circum- 
stances at the moment of imprint vulnerability. (Recall the 
gosling who imprinted the ping-pong ball.) Some imprint brav- 
ery, inquisitiveness and the exploratory drive; others imprint 
timidity, infophobia (fear of the unpredictable) and withdrawal, 
of which the extreme case is the sad imprint called autism or 
childhood schizophrenia. 

All of which is robotic, until one learns how to reprogram and 
reimprint one's own brain circuits. In most cases, such meta- 
programming skill is never acquired. It all goes by in a flash, on 
mechanical auto-pilot, in zero time. "I just found myself doing 
it," says the soldier as he is being court-martialled for cowardice 
or decorated for bravery. 


TIMID 

RETREAT 



It's safe out here! 



CONFIDENT 

ADVANCE 



Oh, Mommy, take me home! 


First-circuit bio-survival consciousness is “one-dimensional” 



52 


Prometheus Rising 


Of course, on top of the hard-wired imprinting of the bio- 
survival circuit comes "softer" conditioning. This allows the 
safe-space perimeter to be generalized outward from the 
mother's body to the pack or tribe — the "extended family." 

Every social animal has, in addition to the Darwinian 
"instinct" (genetic program) of self-preservation, a similar 
"instinct" to protect the gene-pool. This is the basis of altruism, 
and social animals could not survive without it. 

Wild dogs (and wolves) hark to warn the rest of the pack that 
an intruder is coming. Your domesticated dog identifies you as a 
pack-leader; he barks to warn you that an intruder is coming. (He 
also barks, of course, to warn the intruder that he is ready to fight 
for his territory.) 

Ay civilization has advanced, the pack-bond (the tribe, the 
extended family) has been broken. This is the root of the widely 
diagnosed “anomie" or "alienation" or "existential anguish" 
about which so many social critics have written so eloquently. 
What has happened is that the conditioning of the bio-survival 
bond to the gene-pool has been replaced by a conditioning of 
bio-survival drives to hook onto the peculiar tickets which we 
call "money". 

Concretely, a modern man or woman doesn't look for bio- 
survival security in the gene-pool, the pack, the extended family. 
Bio-survival depends on getting the tickets. "You can't live 
without money," as the Living Theatre troop used to cry out in 
anguish. If the tickets are withdrawn, acute bio-survival anxiety 
appears at once. 

Imagine, as vividly as possible, what you would feel, and 
what you would do, if all your sources to bio-survival tickets 
(money) were cut off tomorrow. This is precisely what tribal 
men and women feel if cut off from the tribe; it is why exile, or 
even ostracism, were sufficient punishments to enforce tribal 
conformity throughout most of human history. As recently as 
Shakespeare's day the threat of exile was an acute terror signal 
("Banished!" cries Romeo, "the damned use that word in Hell!”) 

In traditional society, belonging to the tribe was bio-security; 
exile was terror, and real threat of death. In modern society, 
having the tickets (money) is bio-security; having the tickets 
withdrawn is terror. 



Prometheus Rising 


Welfare-ism, socialism, totalitarianism, etc. represent at- 
tempts, in varying degrees of rationality and hysteria, to re-create 
the tribal bond by making the State stand-in for the gene-pool. 
Conservatives who claim that no form of Welfare is tolerable to 
them are asking that people live with total bio-survival anxiety 
and anomie combined with terror. The conservatives, of course, 
vaguely recognize this and ask for "local charity" to replace 
State Welfare — i.e., they ask for the gene-pool to be restored by 
magic, among people (denizens of a typical city) who are not 
genetically related at all. 

On the other hand, the State is not a gene-pool or a tribe, and 
cannot really play the bio-survival unit convincingly. Everybody 
on Welfare becomes paranoid, because they are continually wor- 
rying that they are going to get cut off ("exiled") for some minor 
infraction of the increasingly incomprehensible bureaucratic 
rules. And in real totalitarianism, in which the bogus identifica- 
tion of the State with the tribe is carried to the point of a new 
mysticism, the paranoia becomes total. 

Real bonding can only occur in face-to-face groups of reason- 
able size. Hence, the perpetual attempt (however implausible in 
industrial circumstances) to decentralize, to go back to the tribal 
ethos, to replace the State with syndicates (as in anarchism) or 
affinity-groups (Reich's "Consciousness III"). Recall the hippie 
crash-pad of the sixties, which lives on in many rural communes. 

Back in the real world, the tickets called "money” are the bio- 
survival bond for most people. Anti-Semitism is a complex 
aberration, of many facets and causes, but in its classic form (the 
"Jewish Bankers' Conspiracy") it simply holds that a hostile 
gene-pool controls the tickets for bio-security. Such paranoia is 
inevitable in a money economy; junkies have similar myths 
about who controls the supply of heroin. Thus, as anti-Semitism 
has declined in America, the "Bankers' Conspiracy" lives on in a 
new form. Now the villains are old New England WASP fami- 
lies, the "Yankee Establishment." Some Leftists will even show 
you charts of the genealogies of these WASP bankers, the way 
anti-Semites used to show Rothschild genealogies. 



54 


Prometheus Rising 



THE ALPHA MALES 
EAT FIRST: 

THE RUNTS OF THE 
LITTER GET WHATEVER IS 
LEFT OVER. 


Prometheus Rising 


55 


C.H. Douglas, the engineer and economist, once made up a 
chart, which he showed to the MacMillan Commission in 1932 
when they were discussing money and credit regulation. The 
chart graphed the rise and fall of interest rates from the defeat of 
Napoleon in 1 8 1 2 to the date the Commission met in 1932, and 
on the same scale, the rise and fall of the suicide rate in that one 
twenty-year period. 

The two curves were virtually identical. Every time the inter- 
est rate went up, so did the suicide rate; when interest went 
down, so did suicide. This can hardly be "coincidence." When 
interest rises, a certain number of businessmen go bankrupt, a 
certain number of workers are thrown out of their jobs, and 
everybody's bio-survival anxiety generally increases. 

Marxists and other radicals are urgently aware of such factors 
in "mental health" and hence scornful of all types of academic 
psychology which ignore these bio-survival issues. Unfortu- 
nately, the Marxist remedy— making everybody dependent for 
bio-survival on the whims of a State bureaucracy — is a cure 
worse than the disease. 

Bio-survival anxiety will only permanently disappear when 
world-wide wealth has reached a level, and a distribution, where, 
without totalitarianism, everyone has enough tickets. 

The Hunger Project, the idea of the Guaranteed Annual 
Income, Douglas’ National Dividend plan, etc. represent groping 
toward that goal. The ideal can only be achieved in a technology 
of abundance. 

Extreme cases — persons who take their heaviest imprint on 
the first (oral) circuit — tend to be viscerotonic, because this 
imprint determines lifelong endocrine and glandular processes. 
Thus, in extreme they are "baby-faced" in adult life, never lose 
their "baby-fat," are plump and round and gentle, etc. They are 
easily "hurt" (threatened: terrified) by disapproval of any sort, 
because in the baby-circuit of the brain, disapproval suggests 
extinction by loss of the food supply. 

We all have this circuit and need to exercize it periodically. 
Cuddling, sucking, hugging etc. and daily playing with (a) one's 
own body (b) another's body and (c) the environment, are per- 
petually necessary to neurosomatic-endocrine health. Those who 
deny such primordial functions because of rigid imprinting on 



56 


Prometheus Rising 


the Third (rationalistic) or Fourth (moralistic) circuit tend to 
become "dried up," "prune-faced," unattractive, "cold," and 
muscularly rigid. 

The baby-functions of playing with one's own body, another's 
body and the environment continue throughout life in all 
animals. This "playfulness" is a marked characteristic of all con- 
spicuously healthy individuals of the sort Maslow calls “self- 
actualizers.” 

If this initial imprint is negative— if the universe in general 
and other humans in particular are imprinted as dangerous, 
hostile and frightening— the Prover will go on throughout life 
adjusting all perceptions to fit this map. This is what is known as 
the "Injustice Collector" syndrome (in the language of Dr. 
Edmund Bergler). The female members of this imprint goup 
become Radical Feminists; the male members are less organized 
and can be found in fringe groups of the extreme Left and 
extreme Right. 

Such a pattern is unconscious in three ways. It is unconscious 
because automatic: it happens without thought, as a robot pro- 
gram. It is also unconscious because it began before the infant 
had language and hence it is pre- verbal, inarticulate , felt rather 
than considered. And it is unconscious because it is all-over-the- 
body-at-once. Specifically, it is characterized by the Respiratory 
Block first noted by Wilhelm Reich: a chronic muscular armor- 
ing that prevents proper, relaxed breathing. Popular speech 
recognizes this state as "being up-tight." 

All of the most successful reimprinting techniques (therapies) 
for this kind of chronic anxiety work on the body first, not on the 
"mind." The Reichians, Rolfers, Primal Scream therapists, Orr's 
“rebirthers,” Gesaltists, etc. all know, whatever specialized 
jargons they may use, that a bad bio-survival imprint can only be 
corrected by working on the biological being itself, the body that 
feels perpetually vulnerable and under attack. Even Neurolin- 
guistic Programming (NLP) begins by inducing the patient to 
relax and breathe easily. 

As Gregory Bateson has pointed out. Konrad Lorenz acquired 
his marvelous insights into the imprinting process — for which he 
won the Nobel prize — by consciously imitating the body move- 
ments of the animals he was studying. Watching Lorenz lecture. 



Prometheus Rising 


57 


one could "see" each animal he discussed, because Lorenz would 
dramatize or "become" that animal, in the manner of a Method 
Actor. 

Even earlier, Wilhelm Reich discovered that he could under- 
stand his patients with remarkable clarity by imitating their 
characteristic body movements and postures. The bio-survival 
imprints, especially traumatic ones, are all-over-the-body, frozen 
(in Reich's metaphor) in chronic muscle and gland mechanisms. 

If you can't understand somebody's "irrational" behavior, 
start by observing their breathing. You will very quickly get an 
idea of what is bothering them. This is why all schools of yoga — 
Buddhist, Hindu or Sufi— place such emphasis on restoring natu- 
ral breathing before trying to move the student on to higher 
circuits and wider consciousness. 

This is of more than "psychological" import. Every study of 
the psychosomatic aspects of cancer and asthma, for instance, 
finds this pattern of chronic muscular contraction (subjectively 
felt as anxiety) among the predisposing factors. What the 
Thinker thinks, the Prover proves. People are strangling their 
inner organs every day because they are afraid. 

Mary Baker Eddy may have been exaggerating slightly when 
she said, "All illness is manifested fear;” but holistic medicine 
more and more recognizes that if that damned word "all" is 
replaced by a more tentative "most," Mrs. Eddy was close to the 
facts. 

Even old-fangled M.D.s who won't consider holistic ideas for 
a minute, admit that some persons are mysteriously "more sus- 
ceptible" to disease than other persons. What is this metaphysical 
"susceptibility"? Anthropologist Ashley Montagu has collected 
numerous statistics on children who were deprived of maternal 
love at the crucial point of imprint vulnerability in infancy. They 
not only died younger than the national average, but were sicklier 
all their lives and even grew up to be several inches shorter than 
the average adult height for their sex. 

What makes for "susceptibility" (aside from possible genetic 
factors) can only be such an anxiety imprint (muscle tension) on 
the first circuit. 

Christian Science — or any other religion that dogmatically 
insists that "God" wants us to be happy and successful — can 



55 


Prometheus Rising 


cure such conditions "miraculously." What the Thinker thinks the 
Prover proves. Absolute faith that "God" is supporting you, 
beamed out from the brain all day long, day after day, signals the 
muscles to relax, and natural buoyancy and health returns. 

Throughout human life , when the bio-survival circuit senses 
danger, all other mental activity ceases. All other circuits shut 
down until the bio-survival problem is "solved," realistically or 
symbolically. This is of crucial importance in mind-washing and 
brain-programming. 

To create a new imprint, first reduce the subject to the state of 
infancy, i.e., bio-survival vulnerability. We will enlarge upon this 
later. 

In pre-neurological terms, the bio-survival circuit is what we 
usually call “consciousness, "perse. It is the sense of being here- 
now, in this vulnerable body, subject to the raw energies and 
forces of the physical universe. When we are "unconscious," the 
bio-survival circuit is turned off and doctors may cut us up with- 
out our attempting to flee or even crying out. 

EXERCIZES 

1. Determine to enjoy this primitive circuit fully from now on. 
Play with yourself and others and the environment shamelessly, 
like a newborn baby. Meditate on "Unless ye become as a little 
child, ye shall in no wise enter the Kingdom of Heaven." 

2. Never mind your diet — you will reach the optimum weight 
for your height when your brain is operating properly. Enjoy one 
really sweet and gooey desert every week. Diabetics, of course, 
should buy this goody in the non-sugar section. 

3. Get "high" (on marijuana if this is permissible to your 
superego, or on ginseng, which is legal everywhere and recom- 
mended by many holistic physicians) and then go to a health spa. 
Enjoy a good swim, a massage and a sauna. Repeat every week, 
forever. 

4. Take a course on kung fu or karate for at least three 
months, then re-read this whole chapter. You will be surprised at 
how much more every sentence will mean. 

5. Lie on your back and pant rapidly to the count of 20. (Each 
exhale-inhale cycle counts as one, not as two.) Panting means 
breathing rapidly through your mouth, as forbidden by almost all 



Prometheus Rising 


59 


experts on health, but this is only an exercise, not a full-time 
practice. When you reach 20, stop and resume nose-breathing, in 
the slow, rhythmic manner recommended by yogis, to the count 
of 20. Then repeat the panting to the count of 20. Then repeat 
proper yoga breathing. 

This is known as the "breath of fire" in Tantric yoga. The 
results are most amusing and enlightening. Try it! 1 

6. Visit an aquarium and observe very closely. Try to see the 
bio-survival circuit of the fish brain in operation and recognize 
when and how that circuit in your own brain has operated 
throughout your life. 

7. If you don't have a baby, or haven't had one for many 
years, play with somebody else’s baby for an hour. Then reread 
this chapter. 



Like opiate use, this exercize seems to trigger neuro-transmitters 
similar to mother's milk; i.e., it takes you back to the snug security of 
breast-feeding. And it is not addictive. 




CHAPTER FOUR 


THE ANAL EMOTIONAL 
TERRITORIAL CIRCUIT 


Run, puppy, run! 

Run, puppy, run! 

Yonder comes the big dog - 
Run, puppy, run! 

— Children's rhyme 



61 






The second circuit, the emotional-territorial networks of the 
brain, is concerned entirely with power politics. This "patriotic" 
circuit is built into all vertebrates and is perhaps 500 million to 
1000 million years old. In the modern human it seems to be 
centralized in the thalamus — the "back brain" or "old brain" and 
is linked with the voluntary nervous system and the muscles. 

This circuit appears in each newborn when the DNA master 
tape sends out RNA messenger molecules to trigger the mutation 
from neonate to “toddler ,” which involves first of all standing 
erect. Walking, mastering gravity, overcoming physical obstacles 
and learning to manipulate others politically are the vulnerable 
points at which imprinting and heavy conditioning occur. The 
muscles that perform these power functions are quickly pro- 
grammed with what become chronic, life-long reflexes. 

Depending as always the accidents of the environment — what 
happens at points of neurological vulnerability— this circuit will 
organize itself into a strong, dominating role in the pack (or 
family) or a weak, submissive role. Without going into the 
jungles with the ethologists, one can observe this mammalian 
imprinting process in any litter of puppies. It is very quickly 
determined who is TOP DOG and who is BOTTOM DOG. 

Status in the pack or tribe is assigned on the basis of pre- 
verbal signaling system (kinesics) in which these muscle reflexes 
are crucial. All of the emotional games or cons listed in the 
popular psychological game-manuals of Dr. Eric Berne and the 
Transactional Analysts are second-circuit imprints, or standard 
mammalian politics. 

To quote from my novel Schrodinger’s Cat: 

Most of the domesticated primates of Terra did not know they 
were primates. They thought they were something apart from 
and "superior" to the rest of the planet. 

Even Benny Benedict's "One Month to Go" column was 
based on that illusion. Benny had actually read Darwin once, 
in college a long time ago, and had heard of sciences like 
ethology and ecology, but the facts of evolution had never 
really registered on him. He never thought of himself as a 
primate. He never realized his friends and associates were 
primates. Above all, he never understood that the alpha males 
of Unistat were typical leaders of primate bands. As a result of 
this inability to see the obvious, Benny was constantly alarmed 



64 


Prometheus Rising 


and terrified by the behavior of himself, his friends and associ- 
ates and especially the alpha males of the pack. Since he didn't 
know it was ordinary primate behavior, it seemed just awful to 
him. 

Since a great deal of primate behavior was considered just 
awful, most of the domesticated primates spent most of their 
time trying to conceal what they were doing. 

Some of the primates got caught by other primates. All of 
the primates lived in dread of getting caught. 

Those who got caught were called no-good shits. 

The term no-good shit was a deep expression of primate 
psychology. For or instance, one wild primate (a chimpanzee) 
taught sign language by two domesticated primates (scientists) 
spontaneously put together the signs for "shit" and "scientist" 
to describe a scientist she didn't like. She was calling him shit- 
scientist. She also put together the signs for "shit" and 
"chimpanzee" for another chimpanzee she didn't like. She was 
calling him shit-chimpanzee. 

"You no-good shit," domesticate primates often said to 
each other. 

This metaphor was deep in primate psychology because 
primates mark their territories with excretions, and sometimes 
they threw excretions at each other when disputing over terri- 
tories. 

One primate wrote a long book describing in vivid detail 
how his political enemies should be punished. He imagined 
them in an enormous hole in the ground, with flames and 
smoke and rivers of shit. This primate was named Dante 
Alighieri. 

Another primate wrote that every primate infant goes 
through a stage of being chiefly concerned with bio-survival, 
i.e., food, i.e., Mommie's Titty. He called this the Oral Stage. 
He said the infant next went on to a stage of learning mam- 
malian politics, i.e., recognizing the Father (alpha-male) and 
his Authority and territorial demands. He called this, with an 
insight that few primates shared, the Anal Stage. 

This primate was named Freud. He had taken his own 
nervous system apart and examined its component circuits by 
periodically altering its structure with neurochemicals. 

Among the anal insults exchanged by domesticated pri- 
mates when fighting for their space were: "Up your ass," "Go 
shit in your hat," "You're full of shit," and many others. 



Prometheus Rising 


65 


One of the most admired alpha-males in the Kingdom of 
the Franks was General Canbronne. General Canbronne won 
this adulation for the answer he gave when asked to surrender 
at Waterloo. 

“Merde, ’’was the answer General Canbronne gave. 

The word petard means a kind of bomb. It comes from the 
same Olde English root as fart. 

General Canbronne’s mentality was typical of the alpha- 
males of the military caste. 

When primates went to war or got violent in other ways, 
they always said they were about to knock the shit out of the 
enemy. 

They also spoke of dumping on each other. 



The standard "authority" reflex on the emotional-territorial 
circuit is to swell the muscles and howl. You will find this 
among birds as well as mammals, and in the Board meeting of 
your local bank. The standard "submission" reflex is to shrink 
the muscles, lower the head, and "crawl away." You will find 
this among dogs, primates, fowl and employees who wish to 
keep their jobs everywhere. 

If the first (bio-survival) circuit is chiefly imprinted by the 
mother, the second (emotional-territorial) circuit is chiefly 
imprinted by the father — the nearest alpha male. It has been 
proposed, by sociologist G. Rattray Taylor that societies swing 
back and forth between “Matrist” periods, in which motherly 



66 


Prometheus Rising 


oral values predominate, and “Patrist” periods, in which fatherly 
anal values are in ascendance. 



THE STANDARD AUTHORITY REFLEX 




Prometheus Rising 


67 


Taylor’s table of the characteristics of these “Matrist” and 
“Patrist” periods is as follows: 


MATRIST 

Permissive toward sex 
Freedom for women 
Women have high status 
Chastity not valued 
Egalitarian 
Progressive 
No distrust of research 
Spontaneous 

Sex differences minimized 
Fear of incest 
Hedonic 
Mother Goddess 


PATRIST 

Restrictive toward sex 
Limitation of freedom for women 
Women have low status 
Chastity highly valued 
Authoritarian 
Conservative 
Distrust of Research 
Inhibitions 

Sex differences maximized 
Fear of homosexuality 
Ascetic 
Father God 


Whether or not societies wobble between these extremes as 
Taylor claims, individuals certainly do. These are merely the 
consequences of (a) having the heaviest imprint on the oral 
(Matrist) bio-survival circuit or (b) having the heaviest imprint 
on the anal (Patrist) territorial circuit. 

In pre-ethological terms, the emotional-territorial circuit is 
what we usually call "ego." Ego is simply the mammalian recog- 
nition of one ’s status in the pack; it is a "role" as sociologists 
say, a single brain circuit which mistakes itself for the whole 
Self, the entire brain-mind apparatus. The "egotist" behaves like 
"a two year old," in the common saying, because Ego is the 
imprint of the toddling and toilet-training stage. 

The question of how human an animal is (especially a pet dog 
or cat) never ceases to divide scientists from laypersons — and 
one scientist from another. In terms of the present theory, the 
differences between domesticated primates (humans) and other 
domesticated animals are virtually nil, as long as we are talking 
only about the first two circuits. (Since most people spend most 
of their time on these primitive circuits, the differences are often 



68 


Prometheus Rising 


much less obvious than the similarities.) Real differences begin 
to appear when the third, semantic circuit enters the picture. 



MOST MAMMALS MARK THEIR TERRITORIES WITH 
EXCRETIONS. DOMESTICATED PRIMATES MARK THEIR 
TERRITORIES WITH INK EXCRETIONS ON PAPER. 

For instance, novice dog-trainers always make the mistake of 
using too many words. Because the dog is so "human" in so 
many ways (canines, like primates, are great mimics), the novice 
imputes too much "humanity" to them. The average dog has a 
vocabulary of around 150 words, and within that semantic 
universe is quite bright. It is very easy to teach a dog the mean- 
ing of "Sit," "Stay," "Attack," etc.; and the dog will learn the 
meaning of "walk" and "food" even without your trying to teach 
him. The problem begins when the novice expects the dog to 
understand something like "No, no, Fritz — anywhere else in the 
bedroom, but not on the bed." Even a non-English-speaking 
human would not grasp that, except vaguely. The dog gives up 



Prometheus Rising 


on such sentences and guesses what he can from your mamma- 
lian (and unconscious) body-language. 

Understanding these distinctions can vastly improve primate- 
canine communication. For instance, my wife, a sociologist, 
trained our dog. Fang, not to beg at the table in the most direct 
mammalian language possible. She simply growled at him the 
first few times he approached her while she was eating. (She had 
been reading ethology, of course.) Fang understood fully; he 
soon learned to avoid the table while the Pack-Leaders (my wife 
and myself) were eating. His genetic programs told him we were 
the Big Dogs, or as close to the Big Dogs as he could find in that 
environment; dogs, like wolves, have a genetic program about 
not annoying the Big Dogs while they're eating. The growl told 
him all he needed to know about the local parameters of that 
rule. Fang, incidentally, was a Dachshund-Labrador mix, and 
strange -looking to most humans. People would stop me on the 
street while I was walking him and ask, “What. . .IS. . .that???” 

Persons (extreme cases) who take the heaviest imprint on this 
territorial-emotional circuit tend to be musculotonic. That is, 
they hold most of their attention and energy, in the muscular 
attack-defense systems and grow up medium weight — heavy 
enough to be hard to knock down, light enough to be quick and 
sinewy. Often, they become body-builders, weight-lifters etc. 
and have an extraordinary absorption in demonstrating their 
strength. (Even shaking hands with them, you get the message 
that they are not exchanging amity but demonstrating power.) 

Most societies shunt these types into the military where their 
propensities are put to proper ethological use, defending the 
tribal turf. The anal orientation of this circuit explains the oddity 
of military speech first noted by Norman Mailer: "ass" means 
one's whole self and "shit" means all surrounding circumstance. 



Prometheus Rising 



Viscerotonic 

EXTREME 
Circuit I Type 
Oral Imprint 


Musculotonic 

EXTREME 
Circuit II Type 
Anal Imprint 


IMPRINTING AFFECTS THE WHOLE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AFFECTS THE WHOLE BODY. 



Prometheus Rising 



The second, emotional-territorial circuit, creates a two-dimensional 
social space in conjunction with first-circuit advance-retreat. 



Prometheus Rising 


DOMINANCE 



The grid of Circuits I and II creates four quadrants. Note that 
Hostile Strength (the tyrant) is inclined to paranoid withdrawal; he 
must govern, but he is also afraid. Cf. the careers of Hitler, Stalin, 
Howard Hughes, etc. and the inaccessible Castle and Court in 
Kafka's allegories. Note also that the dependent neurotic is not in 
retreat at all; he or she advances upon you, demanding fulfillment 
of emotional "needs" (imprints). 



Prometheus Rising 


73 


These four quadrants have been known since the dawn of self- 
consciousness. For instance, in the terminology of the medieval 
psychology of "humours," these four imprint-types are known as: 


BILIUS HUMOR 

SANGUINARY HUMOR 

(Hostile Strength) 

(Friendly Strength) 

CHOLERIC HUMOR 

PHLEGMATIC HUMOR 

(Hostile Weakness) 

(Friendly Weakness) 


Clockwise, the Sanguinary type (friendly strength) was iden- 
tified with the Lion archetype and the element, fire. The Lion, 
because of the dignity of these big cats, represents "good" 
strength, and the fire represents power. The Phlegmatic type 
(friendly weakness) was identified with the Angel archetype and 
the element water: these people are "too sensitive to fight" and 
"go with the flow." The Choleric types were identified with the 
Bull archetype (truculent suspicion, paranoia) and the element, 
earth, standing for sluggish pseudo "stupidity." (This is the tradi- 
tional stance of defeated races dealing with their conquerors.) 
The Bilius types (hostile strength) were identified with the Eagle 
archetype (symbol of Imperial Rome, the German royal family, 
etc.) and the element air, air probably means sky, because these 
types seem "high and mighty." 

These symbols go back a long way; Cabalists find them in the 
Old Testament (where, indeed, the lion-angel-bull-eagle appear 
in Ezekiel). They are found constantly in Catholic art, associated 
with the four evangelists (Matthew-angel, Mark-lion, Luke-bull, 
John-eagle) 1 and run all through the design of Tarot card decks, 
medieval and modern. 


1 These are the Four Old Men in Finnegans Wake. Matt Gregory, 
because his last name contains ego equals the angel; Marcus Lyons 
equals the lion; Luke Tarpey equals taur, the bull; Johnny McDougal 
equals ougal the eagle. 


74 


Prometheus Rising 


In the clever language of the fashionable Transactional Anal- 
ysis system, these four imprint types are categorized as the four 
basic life scripts, to wit: 


Bilius/Hostile Strength 
“I’m okay; you’re not okay” 

Sanguinary/Friendly Strength 
“I’m okay; you’re okay” 

Choleric/Hostile Weakness 
“I’m not okay; you’re not okay” 

Phlegmatic/Friendly Weakness 
“I’m not okay; you’re okay” 


It is the Phlegmatic (friendly weakness; dependent neurotic) 
type who generally turn up in the psychotherapist's office seek- 
ing reimprinting voluntarily. They are not-okay, but they have 
great faith that the therapist is okay. 

The Bilius (hostile strength) and Choleric (hostile weakness) 
arrive in therapy, if at all, only because their associates or fami- 
lies, or more commonly, a law court, has ordered them to try to 
reimprint their compulsive hostilities. 

The Sanguinary (friendly strength) type virtually never comes 
for psychotherapy. He or she is satisfied with his or her life, and 
so is the rest of society. Alas, they nonetheless can get to the 
position where they need therapy of some sort, simply because 
they may take on too much responsibility and carry too many 
burdens. They will generally arrive at the therapists only if sent 
there by an M.D. who has intuited where their ulcers came from. 

This system is not meant to be rigid or to imply that there are 
only four types of humanoid robots. The later circuits, still to be 
discussed, modify all this considerably: some imprints are wob- 
bly (cover two or more quadrants partly); and we are all capable 
of sudden brain change. It is also important to realize that the 
four archetypes are /or convenience only — and they are conve- 
nient, as witness their reappearance in Transactional Analysis, 
where their historical connection with Lion-Angel-Bull-Eagle 
isn't even recognized. But each quadrant can be subdivided 
much more sharply, if necessary for diagnostic purposes. 


Prometheus Rising 


75 


For instance, the most widely used psychological test in this 
country the Leary Interpersonal Grid (1957) divides the four 
quadrants into sixteen sub-quadrants and allows one to grade 
each in terms of moderate-to-excessive tendency to behave that 
way. In the grid on which the Leary categories are drawn, the 
moderate imprints are in toward the center and the excessive or 
extreme cases are out toward the perimeter, but what is being 
measured is still basically the way the first two circuits (oral-bio- 
survival and anal-territorial) are imprinted. 

To clarify this a bit further, imagine that four babies were all 
born at the same instant in John J. Boscowitz Memorial Hospital, 
Enny Town, planet Earth. We come back twenty years later and 
we find that each of them has a separate personality and life-style 
(a problem for the astrologers, but let that pass). To make things 
easier for us, they have actually landed in our four quadrants. 

Subject #1 is Responsible/Over-Conventional (Sanguinary). 
Everybody agrees that SHe (she or he) is usually a beloved 
community leader — helpful, considerate, friendly and solidly 
successful. Some may even say SHe spoils people with kindness, 
forgives anything, agrees with everybody and actually enjoys 
governing those who cannot govern themselves. The noble Lion. 

This person may be (and probably is) a total robot. That is, if 
SHe can never give orders in a strict way, is never able to doubt 
others, is never ego-centered, etc. then SHe has mechanically 
imprinted the First Quadrant, "friendly strength." On the other 
hand, if SHe is able to move out of the First Quadrant in appro- 
priate situations (exercizing hostility against the marauder or 
predator, admitting we a kness when overwhelmed), SHe has an 
imprinted-conditioned predilection for "I'm okay, you're okay," 
but is not totally robotized by it. 



RETREAT 


Prometheus Rising 


DOMINANCE 



SUBMISSION 


LEARY'S INTERPERSONAL GRID 


advance 


Prometheus Rising 



THE FOUR QUADRANTS HAVE BEEN RECOGNIZED IN 
MANY AGES AND EXPRESSED IN MANY SYMBOLS. 





75 


Prometheus Rising 


Subject #2 has, after the same twenty years of imprinting and 
conditioning, landed in Quadrant 2 friendly weakness (Phleg- 
matic). SHe is self-critical, shy, timid, easily led, "spineless," and 
always looking for somebody to Take Charge and Give Orders. 
The unearthly Angel, or in modem symbolism, the Flower Child. 

Again, this imprinting-conditioning may be totally robotic, or 
there may be enough flexibility for the person to jump to another 
quadrant when necessary. 

Subject #3 had landed, with total robothood or with some 
small flexibility, in Quadrant 3, "Hostile Weakness" (Choleric). 
She distrusts everybody, rebels against everything, speaks con- 
stantly in sarcasms, complains chronically and is generally bitter, 
resentful and (to some extent) paranoid. The sullen Bull. 

Subject #4 has landed in Quadrant 4, "Hostile Strength" 
(Bilius), and is regarded as "bossy," cold, unfeeling, dictatorial, 
self-important, boastful etc. but still in the judgment of most, "a 
good leader." The imperial Eagle. 

The irony and the tragedy of human life is that none of these 
subjects are aware at all of their robotry. Each will explain to 
you, at great length and with great conviction, why each of these 
robotic, endlessly-repeated reflexes are caused by the situations 
around them, i.e., by the "bad" behavior of other people. 

WHAT THE THINKER THINKS , THE PROVER PROVES. 

Thus, if you put these four primates on a desert island, you 
can predict, with virtually as much certainty as a chemist telling 
us what will happen if four elements are compounded, that 
Subject #1 and #4 (Friendly Strength and Hostile Strength) will 
both try to take over — #1 to help the others, #4 because SHe 
can't imagine anybody else in control. #1 will submit to #4 
because #1 wants things to run smoothly for the good of all, and 
they never will run smoothly if #4 is not TOP DOG. #2, Friendly 
Weakness, will not care whether #1 or #4 rules, just so long as 
somebody else is making the decisions. And #3 will complain 
(and complain, and complain), no matter who is in charge, while 
skillfully avoiding any action that would require taking personal 
responsibility. 



Prometheus Rising 


79 


The same political decisions would be made by four chim- 
panzees or four dogs, if they have the four imprint quadrants 
equally divided as in our hypothetical example. 

Sociobiologists, who are very aware of these four quadrants in 
both human and animal societies, claim that each organism is 
born with a genetic predisposition to play one of these roles. 
Critics of sociobiology, who are dogmatic Liberals, denounce 
this idea as monstrous. We will not attempt to decide that diffi- 
cult question here, since any attempt to decide what aspects of 
behavior are genetic and what are learned after birth always 
descends into ideological metaphysics in the prevailing absence 
of real data. We say merely that, whether or not you or 1 were 
born with a predisposition for one quadrant, all organisms are 
born with a predisposition for imprint vulnerability, and the 
imprint, once set in the neural circuitry, acts as robotically as any 
genetic hard-wiring. 

How imprints can be changed will be discussed as we 
proceed. The exercizes in each chapter are intended to make 
imprints a little less rigid, a little more flexible. 

The top two quadrants of the Leary grid — Friendly Strength 
and Hostile Strength — correspond roughly to what Nietzsche 
called Herrenmoral, the ethics of ruling classes. Indeed, Hostile 
Strength is the embodiment of Nietzsche's "Blond Beast," the 
primitive conqueror-pirate type we find at the dawn of every 
civilization. This is what Nietzsche also called the "animal" or 
“ unsublimated ” Torm of the Will to Power. 

(Friendly Strength on the other hand does not correspond, 
except very slightly, to Nietzsche's “sublimatedWiW to Power." 
To find that we will have to wait until we come to the Fifth 
[Neurosomatic] Circuit — the stage of Conscious Evolution.) 

The bottom two quadrants — Friendly Weakness and Hostile 
Weakness — correspond to Nietzsche's Sklavmoral, the ethics of 
slaves, serfs and “lower”-caste or “lower”-class persons 
everywhere. Nietzsche's concept of "resentment ” — the hidden 
revenge motive within "altruistic" philosophies — claims there is 
an element of hostility within even the Friendly Weakness side 
of the grid; i.e., in conventional "Christian ethics," as typified by 
the image of "gentle Jesus, meek and mild." This paradox — the 
Friendly Weakling is a Hostile Weakling in disguise, the Flower 



So 


Prometheus Rising 


Child a potential Mansonized robot-killer — reappears in modem 
clinical parlance as the concept of "passive aggressive." 
Occultists in their strange jargon describe these types as 
"psychic vampires. ” 

This is why Nietzsche claimed that St. Paul had destroyed the 
evangel (good news) of Jesus and replaced it with a dysangel 
(bad news). The evangel of Jesus, as Nietzsche saw it, was the 
sublimated Will to Power, the path of conscious evolution to 
Superhumanity. The dysangel, the bad news, created by St. Paul 
was traditional Sklavmoral — “Slaves, obey your masters," but 
nourish your resentment with the firm belief that you are "good," 
and they are "evil," and you will eventually have the pleasure of 
watching them burn in hell forever. In Nietzsche's analysis, all 
Marx added to this was the idea of burning and punishing the 
Master Class here and now instead of waiting for "God" to 
attend to the matter post mortem. 

The same analysis appears in e.e. Cummings' unforgettable 
couplet on the Communist intelligentsia of the 1930s: 

every kumrad is a little bit 
of concentrated hate 

It is interesting, in this connection, that Nietzsche dropped 
"psychological" language from his books as he went along and 
replaced it with "physiological" language. For instance, in his 
later works, such as The Anti-Christ, the "resentment" within 
slave-morality (conventional Christianity) is diagnosed as a 
physiological reaction characteristic of certain physical types. 
Nietzsche was on the right track, but lacking neurology he 
looked for the physical basis of these processes in genetics alone. 
Imprinting theory suggests, on the contrary, that such physiolog- 
ical Bottom Dog reflexes are created by specific triggers at early 
moments of imprint vulnerability. 

But they are nonetheless all-over-the-body-at-once and hence 
physiological. Any Method Actor knows this and his body will 
swell physically if he is playing a strong character and shrink if 
he is playing a weakling. Rod Steiger, in particular, actually 
seems taller or shorter depending on whether he is playing a Top 
Dog or a Bottom Dog. 



Prometheus Rising 


8l 


Remember again that all these categories are for convenience 
and that nature has not employed the sharp boundaries that we 
use in our models of nature. Thus, with Leary's 1957 schemata, 
we can further sub-divide our 4 types into 16 types with 4 
degrees of each, for a total of 64 sub-types. 

In the next section, to simplify what may be growing too 
complex, we will reduce everything again just to the inter- 
actions of the first two circuits. 

Any system for describing human behavior should be flexible 
enough to be extended indefinitely, and should also still contain 
meaning when reduced back to its fundamentals. 

Since we all contain a territorial-emotional circuit we need to 
exercize it daily. 

Playing with children is one good exercize — especially if you 
play with large groups, in which case you will have to referee 
mammalian territorial disputes. Swimming, jogging or whatever 
else appeals to you is good, to keep the muscles from feeling you 
are trying to starve them. Trying to "psych out" somebody else’s 
emotional state is one of the best exercizes for this circuit, and is 
very educational in general. It activates the old mammal centers 
in the thalamus where body-language communicates emotional 
signals. 

A good General uses this circuit to "psych out" what the 
enemy General is planning. A good mother uses it, vice versa, to 
figure out what baby's howl means in each particular case. 

Advanced work with this circuit, involving some hazards in 
personal relations, would involve such games as learning to bully 
somebody if you’ve never been able to do that before, learning to 
submit docilely if you've never been able to do that before, and 
learning to express anger appropriately and letting go of it when 
it is no longer necessary. 

It will be observed by the thoughtful or visually-oriented 
readers that each "extreme" type can be expressed on the Leary 
Grid as a very off-center pie-slice: 



82 


Prometheus Rising 




Friendly 

Strength 


Hostile 

Strength 


Hostile 

Weakness 


Friendly 

Weakness 


Obviously, an ideally "balanced" person — that is, one not 
robotized and able to adjust to circumstances as they arise — 
would not be so off-centered. Such a person would be able to 
move a little bit into each quadrant "according to the times and 
seasons" as the Chinese say, but would basically maintain a 
centered detachment between all of them. She or he could be 
graphed as a circle: 



The dark inner circle would represent the adamantine individ- 
uality of this ideally detached person — detached from robot 
imprints. The grey circle would represent the ability to move out 
into each quadrant in times when that was necessary. 

Circles of this sort, called mandalas, are widely used for 
meditation in the Buddhist tradition. Often they are cornered by 
four demons who evidently, like the Occidental lion, bull, angel 
and eagle, represent the extremes to be avoided. 



Prometheus Rising 



.. .beinghumus, the same roturns. 

— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake 

EXERCIZES 

1 . Whenever you meet a young male or female, ask yourself 
consciously, "If it came to hand-to-hand combat, could I beat 
him/her’ ?” Then try to determine how much of your behavior is 
based on unconsciously asking and answering that question via 
pre- verbal "body language." 

2. Get roaring drunk and pound the table, telling everybody in 
a loud voice just what dumb assholes they all are. 1 

3. Get a book on meditation, practice for two fifteen-minute 
sessions every day for a month, and then go see somebody who 
always manages to upset you or make you defensive. See if they 
can still press your territorial retreat buttons. 2 

4. Spend a week-end at an Encounter Group. During the first 
half-day, try to intuit which quadrant each participant is coming 


1 Opiates and small does of alcohol seem to trigger neuro-transmitters 
characteristic of Circuit I breast-fed tranquillity. Large doses of alco- 
hol often reverse this and trigger neuro-transmitters characteristic of 
territorial struggle. Note the anal vocabulary of hostile drunks as their 
alcoholic intake increases. 

2 A good book on Meditation is Undoing Yourself With Energized 
Meditation & Other Devices, by Christopher S. Hyatt, Ph.D., (New 
Falcon Publications). 


84 


Prometheus Rising 


from. At the end, see if any of them have become less robotized. 
See if you have become less robotized. 

5. Go to the Lion House at the zoo. Study the lions until you 
feel you really understand their tunnel-reality. 

6. Rent a video of the kind of comedy that small children 
like — the Three Stooges, Abbott & Costello, etc. Observe care- 
fully, and think about what function this humor serves; but don't 
neglect to laugh at it yourself. 

7. Spend all day Sunday looking at animal shows on TV 
(getting stoned on weed, if this is permissible to you). Then go 
into the office the next day and observe the primate pack hierar- 
chy carefully, like a scientist. 



CHAPTER FIVE 


DICKENS & JOYCE: 
THE TWO-CIRCUIT 
DIALECTIC 


That why all parks up excited about his gunnfodder. That why 
ecrazyaztecs and crime ministers preaching him mornings. 

— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake 



THE GRACIOUS GODDESS AND THE 
TERRIFYING GIANT HAUNT OUR 
LEGENDS AND OUR LITERATURE. 



Hearasay in paradox lust. 

— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake 


86 



The shock and dismay of the infant when the harshness of tradi- 
tional toilet training introduces the anal-Patrist second-circuit 
values into the previously blissful oral-Matrist continuum is 
conveyed with great artistry in Dickens' David Copperfield.So 
overt is this sequence, indeed, that it is hard to believe it was 
actually written half a century before Freud’s clinical writings. 

Dickens describes an idyllic infanthood in which David lives 
with a widowed mother who can safely be characterized as a 
human embodiment of the bona dea (good goddess) of the 
ancients (who lingers still as the "fairy godmother" in children's 
tales). Onto this happy scene intrudes the horrible step-father Mr. 
Murdstone whose "Jehovah complex" makes him an avatar of 
the punishing father-god. There is no way of obeying all of 
Murdstone’s rules; there are too many of them, and they are 
mostly unstated and implicit anyway. David undergoes some 
monumental lashings on the buttocks (for his own good, of 
course, although Dickens emphasizes in a quite Freudian way the 
obvious enjoyment Murdstone obtains from these sessions). 
Quite naturally, David begins to internalize this anal system of 
values and imagines he is quite a guilty little wretch and richly 
deserves this torture. Then Dickens inserts the following scene, 
when David returns from a year at school: 

I went in with quiet, timid step. God knows how infantile the 
memory may have been that was awakened in me at the sound 
of my mother's voice in the old parlour when I set foot in the 
hall. I think I must have laid in her arms and heard her singing 
to me when I was but a baby. The strain was new to me but it 
was so old that it filled my heart brimful like a friend come 
back from a long absence. 

I believed from the solitary and thoughtful way in which 
my mother murmured her song that she was alone, and I went 
softly into the room. She was sitting by the fire, suckling an 
infant whose tiny hand she held against her neck. Her eyes 
were looking down upon its face and she sat singing to it. I 
was so far right that she had no other companion. I spoke to 
her and she started and cried out. But seeing me she called me 
her dear Davy, her own boy: and coming half way across the 
room to meet me, kneeled down upon the ground and kissed 
me, and laid my head down on her bosom near the little 
creature that was nestling there, and put its hand up to my lips. 



88 


Prometheus Rising 


I wish I had died. I wish I had died then, with that feeling 
in my heart. I should have been more fit for heaven than I have 
ever been since. 

The dream of return to oral bio-security is too overt to require 
commentary. 

Similarly, in Joyce's monumental novel of the mind of a man 
asleep, Finnegans Wake, the Father and the Father-God are 
always associated with war and excretion, as Joyce scholar 
William York Tindall has noted. As “Gunn, the Farther," the 
terrifying anal monster combines pistol, deity and flatulence; as 
"Delude of Israel," he is the jealous (territorial) Old Testament 
"Lord of Hosts," i.e., of battles. His insignia, the hundred letter 
thunder-word which recurs ten times in the dream, always com- 
bines Fatherhood, menace, defecation and war: for instance, in 
its first appearance on page 1, it is: 

bababalalgharaghtakamminaronnkonnbronnton 

nerronntounnthunntrovarrhounawnskawn 

toohoohoondenthurnuk 

Here we find Baba (Arabic, father), phonetic Abba (Hebrew, 
father), phonetic Canbronne (the general who so appropriately 
said merde when asked to surrender the territory), phonetic 
Gaelic scan (crack: of thunder or of the anus), ronnen (German- 
ic, excretion), the suggestive orden implying both Germanic 
medal for valor and English ordure, etc. The terrifying Father- 
God elsewhere "Makes his manuvres in open ordure" and 
preaches all the anal-authoritarian values: "No cods before me... 
Thou shalt not commix idolatry... Love my label like myself." 
He is the villain of the “goddinpotty ’’(garden party) — the trick- 
ster-god who set the baited trap in the Garden of Eden; the ego 
internalized in toilet-training (potty); the god of thunder and 
wrath (god-din). 

Fleeing him, the “unhappitants of earth" always seek his 
opposite, ALP (German, dream; also the root of the first letters 
of the Greek and Hebrew alphabets — alpha and aleph, the 
source, the beginning) — Anna Livia Plurabella, when her name 
is written in full: the waters of life combined with all beautiful 
women. She is as oral and loving as "the Omniboss” is anal and 
threatening: 



Prometheus Rising 


89 


...with a beak, with a spring, all her rillringlets shaking, rock 
drops in her tachie, tramtokens in her hair, all waived to a 
point and then all inuendation, little oldfashioned mummy, 
little wonderful mommy, ducking under bridges... as happy as 
the day is wet, babbling, bubbling, chattering to herself, 
deloothering the fields... 

This amniotic river-woman is the perfect mother of infantile 
dream memory and the Great Goddess of the ancients, the ideal 
bio-survival safe, warm place and to her Joyce offers his most 
fervent prayer: 

In the name of Annah the Allmaziful, the Everliving, the 
Bringer of Plurabilites, haloed be her eve, her singtime sung, 
her rill be run, unhemmed as it is uneven! 

Humanity, in Joyce's view as in Rattray Taylor's, is forever 
leaving her to follow the Hero (Father) to "the bluddlefilth of 
Waterloo" (battlefield of Waterloo with blood and excrement 
superimposed to reveal the anal-territorial roots of war) and then 
returning, temporarily chastened, "to list, as she bibs us, by the 
waters ofbabalong.” 

In Chapter Three of Finnegans Wake, the "offenders" 
(invaders) and "defenders" (natives) get so thoroughly mixed up 
that all that remains is a composite "fender" who takes the blame 
for everybody. 

This cyclical view of history, whether in Joyce, Rattray 
Taylor, Vico (Joyce's source), Hegel-and-Marx, etc. is only part 
of the truth, but it needs to be stressed because it is the part that 
most people fearfully refuse to recognize. Whether we speak in 
terms of Taylor's Matrist-Patrist dialectic, Vico’s cycle of 
Divine, Heroic and Urbanized ages, the Marx-Hegel trinity of 
Thesis-Antithesis-Synthesis, or any variation thereon, we are 
speaking of a pattern that is real and that does repeat. 

But it only does so to the extent that people are robotized: 
trapped in hard- wired reflexes. 

When the accumulated facts, gimmicks, tools, techniques and 
gadgets of neuro-science — the science of brain change and brain 
liberation — reaches a certain critical mass, we will all be able to 
free ourselves from these robot cycles. It is the thesis of this book 
that we have been approaching that critical mass for several 



go 


Prometheus Rising 


decades now and will reach the crossover point faster than you 
expect. 

The current rampages of territorial-emotional pugnacity 
sweeping this planet are notjust another civilization falling, Vico 
fashion. 

They are the birth-pangs of a cosmic Prometheus rising out of 
the long nightmare of domesticated primate history 

Of course, these are genetic/historical generalizations which 
do not precisely match any specific family. The gracious god- 
dess/hostile giant archetypes are not activated in cases where the 
mother is cold, rejecting, embittered etc. and the father is the 
warm, supportive figure. The imprints on the first and second 
circuits are statistically deviant in such families and anything 
may result — a shaman, a schizophrenic, a genius, a homosexual, 
an artist, a psychologist, etc. 

EXERCIZE 

In terms of the theory so far developed, analyze the following 
characters: 

‘ * 

1. Scarlett O’Hara 

2. King Kong 

3. Odysseus 

4. Hamlet 

5. Bugs Bunny 

6. Portnoy 

7. Leopold Bloom 

8. Richard M. Nixon 

9. Thomas Jefferson 

10. St. Paul 

1 1 . Donald Duck 

12 Iago 

13. Jane Eyre 

14. Josef Stalin 

15. Joan of Arc 

16. Timothy Leary 

17. Aleister Crowley 

18. The Author 

19. Mao 



Prometheus Rising 


20. Carl Jung 

21. The Secret Chiefs 

22. Hannibal Lecter, M.D. 

23. You 




CHAPTER SIX 


THE TIME-BINDING 
SEMANTIC CIRCUIT 


It says that when you put two minds together, there is always a 
third mind, a third and superior mind, as an unseen collaborator. 

— William S. Burroughs and Brion Gysin, The Third Mind 



93 



HUMAN BEINGS ARE TIME-BINDERS 


The third semantic circuit handles artifacts and makes a "map" (reality- 
tunnel) which can be passed on to others, even across generations. 
These "maps" may be paintings, blueprints, words, concepts, tools 
(with instructions on use transmitted verbally), theories, music, etc. 


94 



Human beings (domesticated primates) are symbol-using crea- 
tures; which means, as the pioneer semanticist, Korzybski, noted, 
that those who rule symbols, rule us. 

If Moses, Confucius, Buddha, Mohammed, Jesus and St. Paul 
can be considered living influences — and they are: look around 
the world — this is only because their Signal has been carried to 
us by human symbol systems. These systems include words, art- 
works, music, rituals and unrecognized rituals ("games") through 
which culture is transmitted. Marx and Hitler, Newton and 
Socrates, Shakespeare and Jefferson, etc. continue to "rule" parts 
of humanity in the same way — through the semantic circuit. 

We are ruled even more, and even less consciously, by the 
inventors of the wheel, the plow, the alphabet, even the Roman 
roads. 

Since words contain both denotations (referents in the 
sensory-existential world) and connotations (emotional tones and 
poetic or rhetorical hooks), humans can be moved to action even 
by words which have no real meaning or reference in actuality. 
This is the mechanism of demagoguery, advertising and much of 
organized religion. 

The bio-survival circuit only divides experience into two sets: 
that which is good for me or nourishing, and that which is bad 
for me or threatening. The emotional-territorial circuit also 
divides the world into two halves: that which is more powerful 
than me (higher in the pecking order) and that which is less 
powerful than me (lower in the pecking order). On this basis 
socio-biological systems evolve and animal "societies" of truly 
human complexity have been studied. 

The semantic circuit allows us to sub-divide things, and 
reconnect things, at pleasure. There is no end to its busy-busy- 
busy labeling and packaging of experience. On the personal 
level, this is the "internal monologue" discovered by Joyce in 
Ulysses. On the historical level, this is the time-binding function 
described by Korzybski, which allows each generation to add 
new categories to our mental library — connecting new things, 
separating new things, reclassifying and reshuffling forever. In 
this time-binding dimension. Einstein replaced Newton before 
most of the world 1 had heard of Newton; simple arithmetic gave 

1 Most of the world was illiterate until the 1970s. 


95 



g<5 


Prometheus Rising 


birth to algebra, which brought forth calculus, which produced 
tensor calculus, etc. Haydn and Mozart prepared the way for 
Beethoven, who broke into the realms that the Romantics and 
Wagnerians took over, which gave birth to what is called music 
today. 

So-called "future shock" has always been with us, since the 
semantic circuit began functioning somewhere in pre-history. In 
a symbolizing, calculating, abstracting species, all times are 
"times of change." The process is however accelerating faster as 
time passes, because the symbolizing faculty is inherently self- 
augmenting. 

In ordinary language, the semantic circuit is usually called 
"the mind." (As psychologist Robert Omstein said in a recent 
radio show, when we say someone "has a good mind," we gener- 
ally mean they have a good mouth, i.e., they use the semantic 
circuit well.) 

In terms of Transactional Analysis, the first (oral) circuit is 
called the Natural Child, the second (emotional) circuit is called 
the Adapted Child, and the semantic circuit is called the Adult or 
Computer. In Jungian terms, the first circuit mediates sensation, 
the second circuit feeling, and the third circuit reason. 

The neurological components of the first circuit go back to the 
oldest parts of the brain; Carl Sagan called these functions "the 
reptile brain." These neural structures are at least billions of 
years old. The second circuit structures appeared with the first 
amphibians and mammals, somewhere around 1000 million or 
500 million years ago; Sagan called them "the mammalian 
brain." The semantic circuit appeared perhaps 100 thousand 
years ago; Sagan called it "the human brain." It should be no 
surprise that most people, most of the time, are controlled more 
by the older reptilian-mammalian circuits than by the human 
semantic (rational) circuit, or that the semantic circuit is so easily 
perverted into false logics (bigotries, intolerant ideologies, fanat- 
icisms of all sorts) when the bio-survival circuit signals threat to 
life or the emotional circuit flashes threat to status. 

Cynics, satirists and "mystics" (circuit V-VIII types) have 
told us over and over that "reason is a whore," i.e., that the 
semantic circuit is notoriously vulnerable to manipulation by the 
older, more primitive circuits. However much the Rationalist 



Prometheus Rising 


91 


may resent this, it is always true in the short run — that is, to use 
one of the Rationalist's favorite words, it is always pragmatically 
true. Whoever can scare people enough (produce bio-survival 
anxiety) can sell them quickly on any verbal map that seems to 
give them relief, i.e., cure the anxiety. By frightening people 
with Hell and then offering them Salvation, the most ignorant or 
crooked individuals can "sell" a whole system of thought that 
cannot bear two minutes of rational analysis. And any domesti- 
cated primate alpha male, however cruel or crooked, can rally 
the primate tribe behind him by howling that a rival alpha male 
is about to lead his gang in an attack on this habitat. These two 
mammalian reflexes are known, respectively, as Religion and 
Patriotism. They work for domesticated primates, as for the wild 
primates, because they are Evolutionary Relative Successes. (So 
far.) 

The emotional-territorial or "patriotic" circuit also contains 
the pack’s status programs or pecking order. Working in tandem 
with first-circuit bio-survival anxieties, it is always able to 
pervert the functioning of the semantic -rational circuit. Whatever 
threatens loss of status, and whatever invades one’s "space" 
(including one's ideological "head space"), is a threat to the 
average domesticated primate. Thus, if a poor man has one status 
prop in his life— “I’m a white man, not a goddam nigger" or 
"I'm normal, not a goddam faggot" or whatever — any attempt to 
preach 1 tolerance, common humanity, relativism, etc. is not 
processed through the semantic circuit but through the emotional 
circuit, and is rejected as an attack on status (ego, social role). 

The attentive reader will remember that the grid of the first 
two circuits puts the pre-verbal child in a two-dimensional 
world, which in the simplest of our diagrams looked like this: 


Of course, preaching itself is bad second circuit politics, since it puts 
you one-up on the person preached-at. You are not one-up unless 
imprinted as such by being an alpha male in the same gene-pool or 
conditioned as such by being a "boss" or other authority-figure. The 
counter-culture of the 1960s, like many other idealistic movements, 
failed because it did so much preaching from a morally one-up posi- 
tion when nobody had been imprinted or conditioned to accept it as 
one-up. 



98 


Prometheus Rising 


DOMINATE 

RETREAT 


SUBMIT 


ADVANCE 


The third, semantic circuit seems intimately connected with 
three dimensionality (although our binocular vision, of course, 
also plays a role here). Specifically, right-handedness is a 
human, or at least a primate, trait. Other mammals show no 
right-hand preference; they are ambidextrous. 

Recent neurology has shown that our right-handedness is 
intimately connected with our tendency to use the left hemi- 
sphere of the brain more than the right. (The left-handed minor- 
ity are discussed below). Indeed, we use the right hemisphere so 
little in ordinary life that for a long time it was called "the silent 
hemisphere. " 

Thus, there is a genetic (hard-wired) preference, in most 
humans, for right-handed manipulations and left-brain menta- 
tions. Now these connections seem intimately involved with our 
verbal, semantic circuitry, because the left brain is the "talking" 
brain. It is linear, analytical, computer-like and very verbal. 
Thus, there is a neurological basis for the linkage between map- 
ping and manipulating. The right hand manipulates the universe 
(and makes artifacts) and the left-brain maps the results into a 
model, which allows for predictions about future behavior of that 
part of the universe. These are the distinctly human (post- 
primate) characteristics. 

The left-handed, on the contrary, specialize in right-brain 
functions, which are holistic, supra-verbal, "intuitive," musical 
and "mystical." Leonardo, Beethoven and Nietzsche, for 
instance, were all left-handed. Traditionally, left-handed people 
have been the subject of both dread and awe — regarded as weird, 



Prometheus Rising 


99 


shamanic, and probably in special communication with "God" or 
"the Devil .” 1 

There is thus a cross-over which makes for a left-right polarity 
in both brain-functioning and hand-functioning, each being a 
reverse mirror image of the other: 

LEFT BRAIN 
(analysis) 

(Circuit III) 


Left Hand 

This double (and reversed) right-left polarity places us neuro- 
logically in three-dimensional space. Rearranging our diagram 
and adding the third circuit, we can illustrate the mind-field as 
follows: 

DOMINATE 




¥ 


RIGHT BRAIN 
(intuition) 
(Circuit VI) 


Right Hand 


To visualize this two-dimensional sketch of a three-dimen- 
sional system it is necessary to imagine that the advance-retreat 

1 Aleister Crowley knew about this pragmatically, before modern neu- 
rology. He taught his pupils to learn to write equally well with both 
hands, thereby forcing the dormant right brain to spring to activity. 



700 


Prometheus Rising 


axis is at right angles to the others — that is, "see" it coming out 
of the page at you. 

This is "Euclidean" space. It is obvious, in this context, why 
Euclidean space was the first kind of space discovered by math- 
ematicians, and by artists, and why it still seems "natural" to us; 
why some have great difficulty in imagining the non-Euclidean 
kinds of space used in modern physics. 

Euclidean space is a projection outward of the way our ner- 
vous systems stacks information on the bio-survival, emotional 
and semantic circuits. 

Thus, the imprint sites of this circuit are located in the left 
cortex and closely linked with the delicate muscles of larynx and 
the fine manipulations of right-handed "dexterity." The cortex 
itself is so recent in evolution that it is often called "the new 
brain"; it is found only in the higher mammals and is most devel- 
oped in humans and cetaceans (dolphins and whales). 

Those extreme cases who take their heaviest imprint on the 
third circuit tend to grow up cerebrotonic. They are tall and 
skinny, because energy is perpetually drawn upward from the 
body into the head. The caricatured evil genius, Dr. Syvlanus in 
Superman, who was virtually all head, represents the extreme 
toward which this type seems to be evolving. Popular speech 
calls them "eggheads." 

Almost always, these cerebrotonic Third-Circuit types ignore 
or are hostile to their first and second circuit functions. Playful- 
ness puzzles them (appeal's silly or eccentric) and emotions both 
baffle and frighten them. 

Since we all contain this circuit, we all need to exercize it 
regularly. Make up a schematic diagram of your business or 
home and try to streamline it for more efficiency. Design a chart 
that explains the whole universe. Every few years, study a 
science you know nothing about, at an Adult Education center. 

And don't neglect to play with this circuit: write poems, jin- 
gles, fables, proverbs orjokes. 

REMEMBER, MR. CROWLEY SAID: 

YOU TOO ARE A STAR 


P.S. HE ALSO SAID: 

DO NOT LUST AFTER RESULTS 



Prometheus Rising 


IOI 



VISCEROTONIC 
Extreme 
Circuit I Imprint 
Jung’s feeling type 
“Natural Child” 


MUSCULOTONIC 

Extreme 

Circuit II Imprint 
Jung’s sensational type 
“Adapted Child” 



CEREBROTONIC 

Extreme 

Circuit III Imprint 
Jung’s rational type 
“Adult” or “Computer” 


THE NEUROLOGICAL IMPRINT IS THE BLUEPRINT 
FOR THE ENTIRE ORGANISM. 



102 


Prometheus Rising 


As with the earlier circuits, the semantic circuit builds all of 
its conditioning and learning onto a bedrock of hard-wired 
imprinting. Thus, many existentially thinkable thoughts are 
socially unthinkable, since (a) everybody in a given society has 
roughly the same semantic imprint and (b) this is reinforced 
daily by assumptions that are mechanically taken for granted. 

Thus, a genius is one who, by some internal process, breaks 
through to Circuit VII — a minor neurological miracle loosely 
called “intuition” — and comes back down to the third circuit 
with the capacity to paint a new semantic map, build a new 
model of experience. Needless to say, this is always a profound 
shock to those still trapped in the old robot-imprints, and is 
generally considered a threat to territory (ideological head 
space). The long list of martyrs to free enquiry, from Socrates 
onward, shows how mechanical this neophobia (fear of new 
semantic signals) is. 

As Thomas Kuhn showed in The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions science itself — the apotheosis of third-circuit 
semantic rationality — is not free of this neophobia. Kuhn 
demonstrated, at length, that each scientific revolution took one 
full generation to turn over the old world view. And Kuhn 
further showed that the older scientists never are converted to the 
new semantic paradigm. They are, in our terminology, 
mechanically hooked to their original imprints. The revolution is 
complete, as Kuhn shows, only when a second generation, not 
hooked to the old imprint, is able to compare the two models and 
decides rationally that the newer one really does make more 
sense. 

But if science, the most self-correcting of all information 
processing third-circuit functions, has this one-generation time 
lag, what can be said of politics, religion, economics? Time-lags 
of centuries, or even millenniums, are common there . 1 

We commented earlier that in bio-survival neurology, there is 
no time. "I just found myself doing it," we say after passing 
through an automatic reflex on the bio-survival circuit. 


This only refers to other people’s politics, religions and economics, 
needless to sag. The reader's own opinions on these subjects are the 
only reasonable and objective ones. Of course. 



Prometheus Rising 


103 


Emotional-territorial circuit actions begin to include time as a 
factor. Dominance signals may not "work": the seemingly 
weaker mammal may offer a counter-challenge. Two dogs will 
walk around each other for several minutes growling and sniffing 
(the chemical secretions of each reveals its actual degree of fear 
to the other) before Top Dog and Bottom Dog becomes clear. 

On the human level, we often agonize over emotional 
decisions, becoming acutely conscious of time as we hesitate. As 
every suspense writer knows, the principle way to increase 
emotional tension is to set a time limit on a difficult or dangerous 
decision. (See any Star Trek script; the time-limit is never 
missing. Or see any of Irving Wallace's bestsellers. Suspense is 
always increased, of course, if the time-limit is abruptly 
shortened just before the climax.) 

On the third circuit, time becomes conceptualized as well as 
experienced. We know ourselves as creatures of time; the "tale 
of the tribe," the totem pole, the Odyssey of Homer, the Old 
Testament, the Vedas, etc. tell us what came before and often 
contains prophecies of what will come later. Science expands the 
third circuit into contemplation of time-spans that stagger our 
imaginations. The very use of written languages and other 
symbols like mathematics creates the time-binding sense of 
Korzybski: we know ourselves as receivers of messages sent by 
sages "of olde” and as potential transmitters of messages that 
may be scanned ages in the future. 

The fourth circuit causes us to be even more involved in, and 
pressured by, time. 

In closing this chapter let us be reminded that Giordano Bruno 
was burned at the stake February 1 8, 1600, for teaching that the 
earth moves. Was he guilty or not? 

EXERCIZES 

1 . If you are a Liberal, subscribe to the National Review, the 
country's most intelligent (and witty) conservative magazine, for 
a year. Each month try to enter their reality-tunnel for a few 
hours while reading their articles. 

2. If you are a Conservative, subscribe to the New York 
Review of Books for a year and try to get into their head-space 
for a few hours a month. 



104 


Prometheus Rising 


3. If you are a Rationalist, subscribe to Fate magazine for a 
year. 

4. If you are an occultist, join the Committee for the Scientific 
Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal and read their journal, 
The Skeptical Inquirer, for a year. 

5. Buy a copy of the Scientific American and read any article 
in it. Ask the following questions: Why do they sound so sure? 
Does the data support dogmatism at this point, or is dogma a 
primate habit (defending head-space)? Will these theories still be 
believed in 2011? In 2593? 

6. Get into a discussion of philosophy with an educated 
Marxist, an intelligent Moslem and a Japanese businessman at 
the first opportunity. 

7. Buy some ZOOM or LIFT (two names for the same caf- 
feine-high stimulant) at a Health Food Store. (This gives a close 
approximation of the effects of illegal cocaine.) When you are 
Zooming or Lifted and your mind is racing, find a victim and ex- 
plain the universe to him or her, until they are able to escape you. 

What you experience in this "speed rap" is what the head of 
the compulsive Rationalist is always like. This is the verbal 
circuit gone wild and totally oblivious to information coming in 
on any other circuit. It explains why most people cannot stand 
Rationalists. "Speed" drugs evidently trigger neuro-transmitters 
characteristic of the verbal centers of the left cortex. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 


THE TIME-BINDING 
DIALECTIC: 
ACCELERATION & 
DECELERATION 


In the dialectic between nature and the socially constructed world, 
the human organism is transformed. In this dialectic man produces 
reality and thereby produces himself. 

— Berger and Luckman, The Social Construction of Reality 


105 




The first and second circuits are Evolutionary Stable Strategies. 
They have worked, in more or less the same form, not just for 
primates but for other mammals, and for many other species, 
over vast aeons of time. 

The third, semantic circuit is an Evolutionary Unstable Strat- 
egy. It could very accurately be called revolutionary rather than 
evolutionary. 

The first two-circuits are based on negative feedback, in the 
biological sense. They maintain homeostasis — that is, they 
return, over and over, to the same ecological-ethological bal- 
ances. The function of negative feedback is to return to such a 
steady state. 

The time-binding semantic circuit is not based on such 
steady-state positive feedback. It is a mechanism of what cyber- 
neticists and biologists called positive feedback. It does not 
return to a steady state, but constantly seeks a new equilibrium at 
a higher energy level. (Negative feedback returns to a fixed 
point, like a thermostat. Positive feedback seeks a moving goal, 
like a guided missile.) 

The first two circuits maintain that which is (more or less) 
constant in human affairs. They are totally cyclical, and relate 
directly to the cycles found in history by Vico, Hegel and similar 
philosophers. 

The third circuit has always been hemmed-in and heavily 
sanctioned with rules, laws, prohibitions, taboos, etc. because it 
breaks up such cycles. It leads, if unleashed, to an upward- 
hurtling spiral. 

In societies where the third, semantic circuit has been partially 
unleashed — it has never been totally freed in any society — the 
upward spiral immediately appears. This used to be known as 
"progress," before that word became unfashionable. 

The upward spiral (whether we call it "progress" or not) is 
characteristic of what Karl Popper calls Open Societies. These 
are secular, humanistic societies — cultures relatively free of 
taboo and dogmatism. 

Such freedom, up to and including the present, is only rela- 
tive, because many taboos are unconscious and pass themselves 
off as "common sense" or "common decency," etc. Whoever 
challenges them is by definition a "heretic," by definition a 
"traitor," or by definition "an irresponsible nut." 


107 



io8 


Prometheus Rising 


(Rationalists, who dominate in relatively Open Societies, also 
have their own taboos, as we shall see.) 

It was historian Henry Adams who first conceived the idea 
that there might be a mathematical expression describing the rate 
of change of human societies. 

Under the influence of Newton's physics, Adams suggested — 
and he was very tentative about this: a fact to be remembered by 
those who ridicule his “naivete” — that the utilization of energy 
might move forward as the inverse square of time just as 
Newton's gravity functions as the inverse square of distance. 

Accepting the anthropology of his day, Adams assumed 
humanity in its present form was about 90,000 plus years old. He 
then reckoned that it took most of that time to arrive at Galileo, 
the scientific method, the beginnings of the Industrial Revolu- 
tion, and the great leap forward in energy utilization characteris- 
tic of the "modern" age, or the Open Society. 

Since 300 is the inverse square of 90,000, Adams assumed 
that the next great leap was happening while he was writing, 
around 1900 — 300 years after Galileo. Looking about him, he 
decided this next jump to higher energy was occurring in the 
researches of the Curies, :who had discovered radioactivity. As 
many commentators have noted, it is impossible to read Adams 
on this subject without feeling that he is very accurately forecast- 
ing the Atomic Age. 

Adams went further, with the exhilaration of a great idea. 
Since 17 plus is the inverse square of 300, he predicted that the 
next great evolutionary stage would begin in 1917 plus. And, 
since the inverse square of 17 is 4 plus, he predicted the next step 
in around 1922. By then, he said, we should have infinite energy 
at our disposal. It didn't quite work out that way. 

Nevertheless, Henry Adams was on the right track. His math 
was just over-simplified. 

Also "on the right track" was Henry's brother. Brooks, who 
was also looking for "laws" in history. Brooks observed a pattern 
which may or may not be entirely true but is as approximately 
true as the similar generalizations of Vico, Hegel, Marx and 
Toynbee. Every civilization, Brooks Adams proposed, goes 
through four stages: 



Prometheus Rising TOg 

{.The monopolization of knowledge by priests. E.g., the 
Egyptian priests kept written language a secret among them- 
selves, as did the Mayan priests. 

2. The monopolization of military power by conquerors who 
made themselves States or governments. E.g., "a French bastard" 
(Tom Paine’s description of William the Conqueror) lands on the 
shore of England with a superior technology— warriors on horse 
versus native warriors on foot — and he becomes King. His rela- 
tives and sycophants become Lords-of-the-land. 

3. The monopolization of the land by these land-Lords. The 
extraction of tribute ("rent") from those who live on the land. 

4. The monopolization of the issue of currency by National 
Banks. The extraction of tribute ("interest") for each piece of 
currency put into circulation. 

Most civilizations seem to have gone through at least three of 
these stages, not always consecutively. Some have passed 
through all four. 

Brooks Adams also noted that centralized capital (the accu- 
mulation of wealth in the hands of a few inter-related families) 
seems to have been moving steadily West throughout recorded 
history. The first major accumulations are to be found in Sumer; 
the center of money-power then shifted to Egypt, to Greece, to 
the Italian peninsula, to various parts of Germany, and then to 
London. At the time Brooks Adams was writing (c. 1900) he saw 
the balance teetering between London and New York, and he 
predicted that the decline of the English Empire would shift the 
balance to New York within the first half of the 20th Century. He 
seems to have been right. Brooks Adams had no theory as to why 
this Westward movement of wealth had been going on for 6000 
years. He merely observed the pattern. 

The shift is still continuing, in the opinion of many. For 
instance, Carl Oglesby in The Cowboy vs. Yankee War, sees 
American politics since 1950 dominated by a struggle between 
"old Yankee wealth" (the New York-Boston axis, which 
replaced London after 1900) and "new Cowboy wealth" (Texas- 
California oil-and-aerospace billionaires). As of 1997, it looks 
like the Cowboys are winning; which is what one would expect 
if there were a real "law" behind Adams' East-West migration of 
capital. 



no 


Prometheus Rising 


One night in 1919, Count Alfred Korzybski awoke from a 
vivid dream, tears of joy streaming down his face, with a vivid 
sense that the passing of signals from generation to generation — 
the third circuit time-binding function — was what distinguished 
us from the other primates. 

Korzybski originally suggested that time-binding could be 
defined mathematically. He dropped this idea later — his math 
was as inadequate as Henry Adam’ s — but it is worth looking at 
for a moment, to retrace the steps by which the actual Law of 
Acceleration was discovered. 

What Korzybski assumed at first was that if all the inventions, 
discoveries, etc. of some hypothetical first generation of humans 
could be represented by P, and the rate by which the second 
generation could surpass this by R then, mathematically, the 
sum total of inventions, discoveries etc. at the end of the second 
generation would be PR. Quite true, algebraically. Then, after a 
third generation, the stockpile would be PRR. And after four 
generations, PRRR. 

Generalized, this becomes PR*, where (t) is the number of 
generations from whatever generation you have picked as your 
base-line. 

The curve of , if you put it on graph paper, ascends more 
rapidly with each generation. Korzybski was looking straight at 
what Alvin Toffler later called "Future Shock" and was trying to 
write a mathematical formula for it. 

Many variables in economic-technological history do, in fact, 
fit Korzybski's PRt function; but others do not. The math, again, 
was too simple; and everything does not change at the same rate. 
Nonetheless, Korzybski, like Henry Adams, was groping toward 
the truth: acceleration is real, and it is intimately connected with 
time-binding, the passing of signals between generations. 

What underlies the accelerations noted by Henry Adams and 
Korzybski is nowadays known as the selection of negentropy out 
of stochastic processes. Our understanding of this is chiefly due 
to almost-simultaneous discoveries (1946-48) by quantum physi- 
cist Erwin Schrodinger, mathematician Norbert Weiner and an 
electronics-communication expert at Bell Laboratories, Claude 
Shannon. 



Prometheus Rising 


III 


A stochastic process is a random series, but it is a special kind 
of random series. In a stochastic process, some agent or agency 
is making selections — picking out of the randomness a pattern 
that is not random. 

A pattern that its not random is known mathematically as 
information. 

Information can also be defined as organization, or as coher- 
ence. 

Gregory Bateson has defined information as "differences that 
make a difference." 

Information — coherence — “differences that make a differ- 
ence” — Korzybski’s Time-Binding— these are all aspects of the 
unpredictable. If you know something already, or can predict it 
easily on the basis of what you do know, it is not information for 
you. Conversely, if you don't know something, or can't predict 
it, it is information. 

The dynamism of evolution, we repeat, is the selection of 
information, coherence, out of a random series of events. The 
emergence of information can be illustrated crudely by the 
following three poemlets: 

Roses are red 
Violets are blue 
Sugar is sweet 
And so are you 

Unless the reader has lived in relative isolation from Ameri- 
can-English folk-culture, this poem had very little information 
for him. You could guess what was coming every step of the 
way. But consider by contrast: 

Roses are red 
Ink is black 
Do me a favor 
Go sit on a tack 

This crude jest (of grade school origin) has more information 
for more readers, because it is less predictable. Another leap in 
information-content occurs in Steve Alien's: 

Roses are red 
Violets are blue 
You think this will rhyme 
But it ain't gonna 



112 


Prometheus Rising 


The humorous unpredictability of this poem gives it, mathe- 
matically, a higher information level than the predictable Valen- 
tine poem we started with. If this is still obscure, try it in terms 
of Bateson's elegant simplification: "Information is difference 
that makes a difference." 

Information is also known mathematically as negative entropy 
or, in a widely used abbreviation, negentropy. 

Entropy is a measure of the deadness of a system. Negentropy 
or information is a measure of the liveliness of a system. 

Evolution is always a matter of at least two stochastic pro- 
cesses, each one acting as "selector" of the other(s). That is, in 
non-living systems, where no such "selection" is involved, 
entropy (lack of coherence) steadily increases, as stated in the 
famous Second Law of Thermodynamics. In living systems, due 
to stochastic co-selection, negentropy (information) steadily 
increases. In Schrodinger’s phrase, “Lif feeds on negative entro- 
py." Life is an ordering, selecting, coherence -making process. 

Without getting embroiled in metaphysics, life (evolution) 
behaves as if it were always aiming at higher coherence, i.e., 
higher intelligence. 

This process accelerates because it is, as Shannon demon- 
strated mathematically, logarithmic. Logarithmic processes are 
such that if you put them on graph paper, the curve rises more 
and more all the time. 

Hence, the accelerations noted by Adams and Korzybski are 
human increments in a process that has been innate in evolution 
all along. 

The human increment accelerates faster than pre-human evo- 
lution because through the third, semantic circuit and its symbols 
(words, maps, equations etc.) we are able to pass information 
(negative entropy: coherence) from generation to generation. 

World-wide wealth in terms of "Real Capital" (plants in 
operation, actual known resources etc.) has been doubling every 
generation since economists started collecting statistics in the 
18 th Century. 

Where does this wealth come from’? According to orthodox 
economists it comes from land, labor, and capital. According to 
Marxists, it comes from land and labor alone, and the capitalist is 
a thief who has inserted an artificial bookkeeping system into the 



Prometheus Rising 1 13 

process. Both are wrong. Land and labor alone, and land, labor 
and capital together, can't produce new wealth if they are all 
organized by a fallacious idea, such as searching for oil where oil 
is not. The real source of wealth is correct ideas: workable ideas: 
that is, negative entropy — Information. 

The origin of these coherent (workable) ideas is the human 
nervous system. All wealth is created by human beings using 
their neurons intelligently. 

A neurotic young man once went to a Zen Master and asked 
how he could find peace of mind. 

"How can you lack anything," the Roshi asked "when you 
own the greatest treasure in the universe?" 

"How do I own the greatest treasure in the universe?" asked 
the young man, baffled. 

"The place that question comes from is the greatest treasure in 
the universe," said the Master, being more explicit than is 
common for a Zen teacher. 

Of course, as a Buddhist, the Master had taken a vow of 
poverty and did not mean exactly what we mean here. But he 
knew that the brain produces all that we experience — all our pain 
and worry, all our bliss states and ecstasies, all our higher evolu- 
tionary vistas and trans-time Peak Experiences, etc. It is also "the 
greatest treasure in the universe" in the most materialistic eco- 
nomic sense: it creates all the ideas which, socially employed, 
become wealth: roads, scientific laws, calendars, factories, com- 
puters, life-saving drugs, medicines, ox-carts, autos, jet planes, 
spaceships... 

If you are not alone in the wilderness, lift your eyes from the 
page and look about. All that you see, whoever theoretically 
"owns" it, is the time-binding product of the materialized or 
manifested ideas of creative men and women. It is all negative 
entropy. Coherent order. 

And it is moving toward higher and more coherent order at a 
faster rate-of-change all the time. 

Of course, if you are alone in the wilderness, you will also see 
coherent order, but in this case, the rate-of-change toward higher 
order is much slower. That is, those stochastic processes which 
we call genetic drift, evolution etc. are co-selecting higher order 
at a different time rate than those stochastic processes which we 



Prometheus Rising 


114 

call human thought, invention, culture etc. (This is why it is so 
hard to reach agreement about whether the natural processes are 
intelligent or not. As Bateson points out, if we accept any order- 
ing process as intelligent, then the biosphere is indeed intelligent; 
but if we save the word "intelligence" only for those ordering 
processes that move at the same speed as our brains, then Nature 
is merely mechanical, not intelligent. To an extra-terrestrial with 
a different time-sense than ours, this question would not arise at 
all.) 

Most of what we perceive in the human environment is made 
up of concretized ideas, in the above sense. Look again at a 
human community; you are seeing the historical human mind 
manifesting itself. 

All ideas are not equally good, of course. 

All manifested ideas (human creations in the biosphere) are, 
therefore, not equally good. 

This is why John Ruskin, a century ago, tried to introduce a 
distinction between wealth and tilth. This distinction did not 
become accepted and incorporated into our language because 
people, at that time, were not ready for it. 

Wealth, in Ruskin’ s sense, consists of all those artifacts 
(concretized ideas) which enhance human life, or life generally. 
Illth consists of those artifacts which destroy, demean or degrade 
life. A factory that pollutes the air or water is illth in this sense; 
so is a bomb, a sword, a pistol, a tank of nerve-gas. 

The Westward migration of Capital noted by Brooks Adams 
was a migration of both wealth and illth. 

Obviously, under primitive planetary conditions — finite space 
and finite resources — the illth was perceived as necessary to 
protect the wealth. Territorial politics are much the same among 
domesticated primates as among other mammals; the primates 
are just smarter at building more omni-lethal weapons faster. 
This was originally a survival trait, an Evolutionary Relative 
Success, because primates are bom without the physiological, 
inbuilt weaponry (lethal teeth, claws, horns etc.) of other 
mammals. 

Since the Age of Reason in the 18th Century, the exponential 
increase in wealth (life-enhancing ideas manifesting) has led to 
more and more Utopian yearnings. At the same time, the equal 



Prometheus Rising 

and opposite increase in illth has led to more and more dystopian 
and apocalyptical fears. 


ms 


(3 (O 

0 bj)> 



CAPITAL HAS MOVED STEADILY WESTWARD BECAUSE 
NEW IDEAS ALWAYS APPEAR ON THE EXPANDING WAVE 

One's expectations about the future — utopia or dystopia — are 
always based on what one thinks is the dominant force in evolu- 
tion. This whole book, not just the present chapter, is based on 
the belief that an overview of evolution shows beyond all doubt 
that wealth-producing faculty (the search for higher coherence) 
is the deciding factor. The illth-producing faculty is an archaic 
mammalian survival system rapidly becoming obsolete. 

The highest historical concentration of wealth (real capital, 
and ideas generating new capital) now co-exists with the highest 
concentration of evolutionarily advanced nervous systems. 



u6 


Prometheus Rising 


In California, Oregon, Alaska, British Columbia. Arizona, 
Texas, the Hawaiian Islands, Japan and all around the Pacific, 
where East meets West, the world of 2000 and 2010 and 2050 is 
being created by persons who are veterans of a gigantic Neuro- 
logical Revolution — the psychedelic pioneers of the 1960s, the 
graduates of the Consciousness Movement of the 1950s-70s, the 
synthesizers of modern psychology and ancient Oriental mind- 
sciences. These persons are called the Aquarian Conspiracy by 
Marilyn Ferguson, one of their spokespersons. They are 
denounced as the Me Generation by Tom Wolfe, a time-traveler 
from New York, i.e., from the neurological past, from a culture 
crystallized before 1 950. 

This "Me Generation" is the temporary high water mark of 
the time-binding function. Moving steadily Westward-— away 
from Tradition, away from Dogma — they are the products, as 
Edmund Burke said of the first Americans, of "the dissidence of 
dissent and the Protestantism of the Protestants." Every heresy 
that left Europe produced newer, wilder heresies in the Eastern 
Seaboard. 1600-1800. Those that were "too far out" had to move 
further West and produced the 1000 Utopian communities 
(anarchist, evangelical, free-love, etc.) that were attempted in the 
mid-West during the 19th Century. Those who were even further 
“out” — out of the traditional mode — moved further Westward in 
the last 30-70 years. 

All of the fallout of this migration seems weird to the Eastern 
states, and even weirder to Europeans. 

It all became much weirder still when it hit the Pacific and 
began to interact with Oriental neuro-sciences and brain-change 
arts, like yoga and Taoism and Zen. 

It swallowed the Oriental lessons whole, without becoming 
Oriental entirely. It remained Western — the dissidence of dissent 
etc. — and it has been gaining momentum and direction for two or 
three decades now. 

It aims at Higher Coherence and Higher Intelligence. 

This is the new Power Elite. 

As youngsters, these Aquarian Conspirators made the Youth 
Revolution of the 1960s, which — whatever its excesses and 
blunders — permanently changed and improved student-adminis- 
trator-teacher feedback in our universities; liberated our Puritan 



Prometheus Rising 


117 


culture for some healthy hedonism; imported a dozen varieties of 
Oriental neuro-science (and two dozen varieties of Oriental 
humbug, alas); launched the ecology movement (the first planet- 
wide perception of the difference between wealth and illth); 
recreated a true love of the wilderness and of wild creatures: 
pioneered flex-time and other liberations from economic robot- 
hood ; 1 launched Women's Lib, Gay Lib, Child Lib and gener- 
ously supported Black Lib; ended the Vietnam War; spread 
holistic medicine throughout our culture; etc. 

The same group is now leading the computer revolution; 
spearheading the drive toward Space Migration; supporting the 
Hunger Project, which will abolish starvation in our lifetimes; 
leading the Longevity revolution and the search for immortality; 
etc. 

And they are all very conscious of being part of the Intelli- 
gence Intensification explosion which is the major topic of this 
book. 

This type of "Western progressivism” (or Utopianism) came 
out of the mid-East and is the distinct contribution of the Jews, 
which is why all reactionaries are intuitively anti-Semitic. As 
William Blake wrote of this tradition: 

The Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel dined with me, and I asked 
them how they dared so roundly to assert that God spoke to 
them; and whether they did not think at the time that they 
would be misunderstood & so be the cause of imposition. 

Isaiah answer'd: ‘I saw no God, nor heard any, in a finite 
organical perception; but my senses discover'd the infinite in 
everything, and as I was then persuaded & remain confirmed 
that the voice of honest indignation is the voice of God, I cared 
not for consequences, but wrote.’ 

This vision of the infinite in everything is common to East 
and West; what is distinctly Western, out of the Jews, is the 
voice of honest indignation against every institution which 
would deny or demean the infinity within each human soul. The 
release of our full human potential- — to let the light of Prome- 
theus shine everywhere — is the distinctly Western mystic tradi- 

Virtually all the computer manufacturing firms in Silicon Valley (the 
peninsula south of San Francisco) have flex-time. The employees 
choose their own working hours. 



n8 


Prometheus Rising 


tion and does not appear in Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism or any 
Eastern religion. 

Thomas Jefferson developed his view that "all men are creat- 
ed equal" from the perception of the infinity within each of us, 
which he learned from the Scottish philosophers, Reid and 
Hutcheson. (It was also from Hutcheson that Jefferson got his 
idea of “unalienable rights," which Congress in the interest of 
stylistic elegance altered to "inalienable rights.”) The Scottish 
Enlightenment, like the French and English Enlightenment, was 
the beginning of the materialization and manifestation of the 
Judeo-Christian vision of the Heavenly City. 

It was also this 18th Century Illuminati circle which intro- 
duced the concept of progress — the conscious formulation of the 
symbolism of Prometheus. This vision has been under so much 
attack in recent decades that to defend it at all will seem archaic 
and eccentric to many readers. 

Nonetheless, evolution is real: quantum jumps do occur 
throughout the biosphere and throughout human intellectual 
history. We are riding a mounting tidal wave of rising conscious- 
ness and expanding intelligence which is accelerating whether 
we like it or not. 

By and large, most people — and especially most ruling 
elites — have not liked this acceleration factor. The migration of 
capital (i.e., ideas) Westward has been largely a flight from 
oppression, an escapist movement — as critics today describe 
Space as "escapist." Everywhere, everywhen, the rulers of soci- 
ety have tried to put a brake on the third circuit, to decelerate the 
acceleration function, to establish limits on what was printable, 
discussable, even thinkable. 

The Greek myth of Prometheus Bound — the Titan who 
brought Light to humanity and is eternally punished for it — is the 
synecdoche, the perfect symbol, of how the third circuit has been 
handled in most human societies. 

The peculiar way most societies have imprinted the fourth, 
socio-sexual circuit — -the weird taboos which restrain us all, in 
every tribe, however technologically “advanced” — is part of the 
acceleration-deceleration dialectic. 



Prometheus Rising 


The fourth circuit has been largely imprinted to serve as a 
brake, holding back the free activity of the time-binding seman- 
tic circuit. 

This is the historical function of taboos and "morality." 

EXERCIZES 

1 . Compare Greece in the 4th Century BC, Rome in the First 
Century AD, Southern Europe at the beginning of the Renais- 
sance, England c. 1600-1900, New York c. 1900-1950, and Cali- 
fornia today. Note the accumulation of wealth corresponding to 
the accumulation of heresies, innovations, cults, kooks, pioneers, 
inventors etc. 

2. Imagine you put a penny on the first square of a chess- 
board, two cents on the second square, four cents on the third, 
etc. How much will you have to put on the sixty-fourth square’? 
This is how time-binding works, in relatively Open Societies. 

3. Read the denunciations of Galileo by the orthodox of his 
time. 

4. Read the denunciations of Beethoven, of Picasso, of Joyce 
by those who knew in advance what music, painting and novels 
should be. 

5. Are the most important scientific ideas of 1997 going to be 
published in Scientific American in 1997, or in 2017? 

6. Research how many years passed between the publication 
of Einstein's paper on Special Relativity and the acceptance of 
the idea by the majority of physicists. 




CHAPTER EIGHT 


THE "MORAL" SOCIO- 
SEXUAL CIRCUIT 


As the caterpillar chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs on, so 
the priest lays his curse on the fairest joys. 

— William Blake, Marriage of Heaven & Hell 


CjHtP^NG 





121 




The socio-sexual circuit is activated and imprinted at adoles- 
cence, when the DNA signal awakens the sexual apparatus. The 
teenager becomes the bewildered possessor of a new body and a 
new neural circuit oriented to orgasm and sperm-egg fusion. The 
pubescent human, like any other rutting animal, lurches about in 
a state of mating frenzy, every call gasping for the sexual object. 

Imprint vulnerability is acute, and the first sexual signals to 
turn on the adolescent nervous system remain fixed for life and 
forever define the individual’s sexual reality. 

We should not be surprised, therefore, at the various fetishes 
that are so easily acquired at these sensitive moments. 

In fact, we can tell precisely at what period in time a person 
was sexually imprinted by noting which fetishes continue to turn 
him or her on. Black garters, booze, cool jazz, and crew cuts 
define the sexual signals of one imprint group (generation) just 
as rigidly as sleeping hags, marijuana, heavy rock and tight 
jeans define another. 

As Masters and Johnson have pointed out, most sexual dys- 
functions are hooked into the nervous system at these adolescent 
moments of acute imprint vulnerability; their archetypal case is 
that of a male who, about to mate for the first time, in the back 
seat of a car, was traumatized by a policeman flashing a light on 
him and his paramour. The imprint of that ghastly moment was 
hooked for decades: the male remained impotent until reim- 
printed by Masters and Johnson in their clinic. 

The choices of heterosexuality or homosexuality, brash prom- 
iscuity or timid celibacy, etc. are usually imprinted by exactly 
similar accidents at points of imprint vulnerability. Just as bio- 
survival anxiety or security are imprinted by accidents in the 
nursing period, emotional domination or submission by acci- 
dents in the toddling period, symbolic dexterity or "stupidity" by 
the accidents of the learning environment. 

Primitives (so-called) know these facts and surround all the 
points of imprint vulnerability with rituals, "ordeals," "rites of 
passage," etc. well designed to imprint the desired traits of a 
well-integrated member of that tribe at that time. Relics of these 
imprint ceremonies survive in Baptism, Confirmation, Bar Mitz- 
vahs, Marriage Ceremonies, the Masonic "raising," etc. 


723 



124 


Prometheus Rising 


It is important to realize that chance, genetics and malice 
(anger) are among the "accidents" that create imprints at the 
points of vulnerability. 

Most humans do not, due to accidents of this sort, imprint 
exactly the socio-sexual role demanded by their society. The 
fourth circuit can almost be called the guilt circuit : almost every- 
body, almost everywhere, is quite busy hiding their real sexual 
profile and miming the "accepted" sex role for their gender in 
their tribe. 

In ordinary language, the imprint on the socio-sexual circuit is 
generally called "the mature personality" or the "sexual role." It 
is "the Parent" in the jargon of Transactional Analysis. 

It is amusing to note that Freud recognized the first circuit as 
the oral stage, the second as the anal stage and the fourth as the 
genital stage. He did not notice the third, semantic circuit — 
perhaps because as an obsessive Rationalist he was so absorbed 
in verbal and conceptual programs that they were invisible to 
him, as water may be to fishes. Similarly, Jung described the first 
circuit as the sensational faculty, the second as the feeling 
faculty, the third as the rational faculty — and skipped the socio- 
sexual circuit entirely. (There may be a clue here as to why Jung 
could not abide Freud's fourth-circuit emphasis and built a 
separate, less sexual psychology of his own.) Jung then went on 
to lump all the higher circuits under the rubric of the faculty of 
intuition. 

It is the function of the nervous system to focus, to select, to 
narrow down; to choose, from an infinity of possibilities, the 
biochemical imprints which determine the tactics and strategies 
that ensure survival in one place, status in one tribe. 

The infant is genetically prepared to learn any language, 
master any skill, play any sex role; in a very short time, however, 
he or she becomes mechanically, robotically, fixated to accept, 
follow and mimic the limited offerings of his social and cultural 
environment. 

In this process, each of us pays a heavy price. Survival and 
status mean forfeiting the infinite possibilities of unconditioned 
consciousness. The domesticated primate, inside the social real- 
ity-tunnel, is a trivial fragment of the potentials for experience 



Prometheus Rising 


125 


and intelligence innate in the 1 10,000000,000-cell human bio- 
computer. As Robert A. Heinlein wrote: 

A human being should be able to change a diaper, plan an 
invasion, butcher a hog, design a building, conn a ship, write a 
sonnet, balance accounts, build a wall, set a bone, comfort the 
dying, take orders, give orders, cooperate, act alone, solve an 
equation, analyze a new problem, pitch manure, program a 
computer, cook a tasty meal, fight efficiently, die gallantly. 
Specialization is for insects. 

But as long as we remain on the antique circuits we are not 
very different from the insects. That is, just as the insects repeat 
their four-stage program (egg, larvae, chrysalis, adult) from 
generation to generation, we repeat our four-stage cycle also. 
The antique circuits are genetically conservative. They ensure 
the survival and continuation of the species, but do no more. For 
future evolution we must look to the futuristic circuits. 



SPECIALIZATION IS FOR INSECTS 



126 


Prometheus Rising 


SUMMARY 


Circuit Origin Imprint 




Sites 

Freud 

I 

3-4 

Limbic 

Oral 


billion 

yrs. ago 

& ANS 


II 

500- 

Thalamus 

Anal 


1,000 

million 

Muscles 



yrs. ago 



III 

100,000 

left 

Latency 


yrs. ago 

cortex, 

larynx, 

right 

hand 


IV 

30,000 

left neo- 

Phallic 


yrs. ago 

cortex, 

breasts, 

genitalia 



Names In Other Psychologies 


Jung 

Berne 

Sagan 

Gurdjieff 

Sensation 

Natural 

Child 

Reptile 

Brain 

Movement 

Center 

Feeling 

Adapted 

Child 

Mammal 

Brain 

False 

Emotion 

Center 

Reason 

Adult 

Computer 

Human 

Brain 

False 

Intellect 

Center 

Ignored 

Parent 

Ignored 

False 

Personality 


It is sometime mistakenly stated that there are no universal 
sexual taboos. This is not true. There is one omni-purpose taboo 
which exists in every tribe. 

That taboo stipulates that sexuality shall not be unregulated 
by the tribe. That is, even though no other taboos are universal, 
the taboo against living without taboos remains constant. Every 
tribe has its own set of verbots and thou-shalt-nots, but no tribe 
allows the individual to choose his or her own set. 

An American President may not marry his own sister (if he 
wants to get re-elected); an Egyptian Pharaoh had to marry his 
own sister. Confronted by this moral relativism, many social 
scientists have failed to notice the invariable: both the President 
and the Pharaoh are expected to obey local rules. So are the 
Samoan, the Russian, the Eskimo and the Cuban. 

Why is there this taboo against sexual self-definition and self- 
actualization? Why is it that, while no two societies can agree on 
what is sexually "good" and sexually "bad," every society thinks 
that it must make some definition? 


1 The Gurdjieff titles are deliberately negative, since he was trying to 
get people off these primitive circuits and into the futuristic circuits. 



Prometheus Rising 


I2J 


The answer is that our first humanoid (symbolizing and con- 
ceptualizing) ancestors were very ignorant, but not at all stupid. 
They were ignorant of the laws of genetics, but they were smart 
enough to suspect that such laws exist. Sperm-egg fusion is sur- 
rounded by violent taboos and fierce tribal conformity because 
the survival and future evolution of the gene pool depends upon 
which particular spermatozoa reaches which particular ovum. 

Etymologists confirm the Freudian theory that there are 
ancient linkages between the words for the sacred, the erotic, the 
obscene, the awe inspiring, the awe-ful, the divine, the 
"thrilling." All of these are primitive, powerful physiological 
responses to the mysteries of sexual attraction, mating, repro- 
duction, inheritance, genetic drift, future evolution. The earliest 
god-forms found by archeologists are pregnant goddesses and 
ithyphallic gods. The most intolerant, bigoted and recalcitrant of 
all prejudices — the very last to fade away after cosmopolitaniz- 
ing contact with other tribes having different values — are the 
taboos concerning the right way to reproduce. If one nation 
insists that the head of state must marry his sister, and another 
insists that he must not, both are acting on the assumption that 
the right way must be found and rigorously enforced. 

There are unknowns in the area of sexual attraction — He likes 
Her, but She doesn't like Him. 

There are unknowns in the area of mating — a young couple 
can make love once, and the woman becomes pregnant, yet 
another couple make love for three years and the woman remains 
barren. Very puzzling and frightening for primitives, in New 
Guinea or New Jersey. 





Prometheus Rising 


129 


There are unknowns in the area of reproduction — why twins? 
Why three boys in one family and three girls in another? Why 
miscarriages and stillbirths? 

There are unknowns in the area of inheritance — “Why doesn't 
my son look like me?" many a domesticated primate has won- 
dered uneasily, leading to a great deal of paranoia and male 
chauvinism. 

There are unknowns in the area of genetic drift — modern 
researchers recognize twelve or more variables, but still have 
more questions than answers. 

There are unknowns in the area 0 future evolution — “Where 
do we come from, what are we, where are we going?”, the title 
of Gauguin's greatest painting, is the basic ontological question; 
the totem-pole, like the treatise on sociobiology, is an attempt to 
answer. 

Amid all these unknowns — of sexual attraction, mating repro- 
duction, inheritance, genetic drift, future evolution — the shamans 
of every tribe try to establish guide-posts to tribal (gene-pool) 
survival. 

Thus "morality" is invented. 


SEXUAL ATTRACTION 



GENETIC DRIFT 
FUTURE EVOLUTION 


Sexual attraction, mating, reproduction, inheritance, genetic 
drift and future evolution are all stochastic processes. (That is, 
processes in which, out of a random series, some "intelligence" 
or something that can be metaphorically conceived as an intelli- 




130 


Prometheus Rising 


gence, is selecting a final outcome.) That these stochastic pro- 
cesses overlap, as shown in our diagram, is intuitively obvious; 
and it is also obvious that the future is being "selected" every 
step of the way . 1 Taboo and morality are tribal attempts to gov- 
ern the random element — to select the desired future. 

"Morality" attempts to control the stochastic evolutionary 
process at two points — interfering between sexual attraction and 
sexual consummation (Mating) by taboos and commandments, 
or else interfering between mating and reproduction. The latter 
case is represented by infanticide a widespread birth-control 
measure always justified by the local shamans on magical 
grounds, e.g., the infants selected for sacrifice are breach births, 
or birth-marked, or twins, or in some way stigmatized by the 
"gods." The actual function of such practices, of course, is popu- 
lation control; and such customs are most common on isolated 
islands where runaway population would be a disaster. Similarly, 
the Judaic taboos functioned to channel all sexuality into 
increased population, since the ancient Jews were surrounded by 
large and pugnacious Empires eager to conquer them; they 
needed more boys for soldiers and more girls to breed soldiers. 

The most "idiotic" and "superstitious" taboos, from the 
Rationalist viewpoint, always had some function when invented. 
For instance, the most “pointlessly” elaborate (non-genetic) 
"incest" taboos, in which virtually everybody in the tribe 
becomes unavailable sexually to everybody else, force exogamy 
(marriage outside the tribe). This creates affectional alliances 
(family ties) between tribes and decreases warfare. Something 
like this primitive exogamy survived into very recent times, in 
the custom of marrying one royal family to another. 

Every form of "morality" is, of course, irksome on some level 
to everybody, because no individual ever has exactly the sexual 
imprint desired by the tribe. The more sophisticated totem-cults 
(the "higher" religions, so dubbed by themselves) take account 

l That the whole chain is "intelligent" or manifests "intelligence," is the 
Lamarckian heresy which Darwinians have never quite been able to 
kill; every time it is buried, it rises again in new form. Two most able 
recent arguments of the neo-Lamarckian or meta-Lamarckian 
position, which the reader is cordially urged to read, are Timothy 
Leary's The Game of Life and Gregory Bateson's Mind and Nature. 



Prometheus Rising 


of this by the doctrine of atonement. In one form or another, this 
allows the individual to be ritually "forgiven" periodically for 
not being the perfect sexual robot decreed by tribal morality. 

This becomes hilarious only when one realizes that most of 
what domesticated primates are asking their priests to forgive 
them for consists of what Kinsey so accurately called "normal 
mammalian behavior .” 1 



Time -binding (the transmission of symbols and tools across 
generations) begins on the third circuit. Acute consciousness 
time is, however, intensified on the fourth circuit. 

1 This only refers to the silly and inferior religions of other people, of 
course, and has no reference to the Sublime Truths of the reader's 
own religion. 



132 


Prometheus Rising 


The principle function of the socio-sexual circuit, in the 
higher primates, is to form an adult personality — a parent . 1 By 
definition, the parent is one who cares for the young of the 
species; by genetic necessity, the parent also cares about the 
young. In symbolizing humans, this means planning, hoping and 
having aspirations. In the language of the mystics, this means 
being "attached" and "trapped on the wheel of karma"; the first 
effort in most mystical traditions is to break this fourth-circuit 
attachment by taking a vow of celibacy. 

The fourth circuit is located in the left neo-cortex — the newest 
part of the left hemisphere of the brain It is linked neurologically 
with the genitalia and the breasts (fucking-hugging-embracing- 
protecting circuitry). 

Persons who take their heaviest imprint on this circuit are 
beautiful. That is, their entire body has received so many sexual 
neurotransmitters from the brain that they are constantly radiat- 
ing the "attractive" mating signals that make up our perception 
of what is "beautiful" in a human being. 

According to accidents of imprinting, they can be coldly cal- 
culating exploiters, totally repressed Puritans or carry some other 
negative traits but they always look like (send the signals of) the 
ideal fucker-lover-protector. 

Once formulated, "morality" serves as not only a check on 
genetic drift but a brake against Circuit III innovation. The 

1 Homosexuality (like left-handedness) is probably included in the 
genetic script to serve auxiliary functions. In most primitive societies, 
the homosexuals (and the left-handed) are shunted into shamanic 
roles. In more complex societies they are (like spinsters and hetero- 
sexual bachelors) usually shunted into intellectual or artistic roles, 
which have quasi-shamanic functions of making, breaking or trans- 
forming cultural signals. Those who claim any perennial sexual varia- 
tion is "against nature" are underestimating nature's variety, diversity 
and economy. The "mutation" of Leonardo de Vinci, a left-handed 
homosexual, was needed to break up the signal of the dying medieval 
reality-tunnel and remake our perceptions into the reality-tunnel of 
post-Renaissance scientific humanism. His success is registered by 
the fact that a Leonardo painting is still the "norm" of what we mean 
by realism, i.e., most people (including right-handed heterosexuals) 
are living in the scientific-humanist "space" this man invented. 



Prometheus Rising 


shamans, priests etc. define which ideas are "moral" and which 
are "immoral." Anything new — anything that will break the 
tribal cycle, i.e., take us out of cyclical mythic "time" into linear, 
progressive, revolutionary “time” — is usually defined, very 
quickly, as "immoral." 

To say that religion and priestcraft have played a conservative 
role in history is an understatement. One might as well say that 
bubonic plague has killed a few people, or that Hitler was a little 
bit strange. The chief role of religion has always been reac- 
tionary. This is its evolutionary function, in the dialectic of the 
circuitry of the brain. 

Circuit III, unchecked, is like a cocaine monologue. You can't 
remember anything, because everything is changing too fast. 
This is profoundly disorienting to the average domesticated pri- 
mate, so the tribal moralists keep stability and tranquility by 
acting as decelerators. 

The average person, similarly, is philosophically most "open" 
and "curious" before the adult sex role of parenthood is elected. 
After reproduction, there is little time for Circuit III speculations, 
and (because of the sanctions every tribe places upon "heresy," 
i.e., new ideas) there is also little inclination. 

Thus, Circuit III tends to take us out of tribal cyclical time 
into linear progressive time; but Circuit IV loops us back into the 
cycle again. 

Homosexuals may or may not be the chief creators of cultural 
innovation, as some Gay Pride advocates claim; but it is certainly 
true that they have done more than their share. The reason? They 
are not trapped into parent roles. 

These four circuits are coded, with four permutations of each, 
into the "court cards" of the Tarot deck. 

Thus the Knight of Discs, representing earth/earth according 
to the occultists, is the pure First-Circuit type-all sensation, all 
oral demand, all viscerotonic. Behind their alchemical, Cabalis- 
tic, theosophical jargon, most books on Tarot are describing this 
type when they discuss this card. The pure undiluted "Momma's 
boy." 



134 


Prometheus Rising 


XI 



IMPRINTING THE SOCIO-SEXUAL CIRCUIT 

A and B represent socially "good" and socially "bad" sex, according to 
the tribe, Al, A2 and A3 represent individual imprints — personally 
"good" sex (what the individual is imprinted to like) — and Bl, B2 and 
B3 personally "bad" (what the individual doesn't like). If Axis Al-Bl 
is only slightly tilted, the individual is fairly "normal" (in that society). 
If A2-B2 is tilted more; the individual is "neurotic" (in that society). If 
A3-B3 is tilted much further; the individual is a "pervert" (in that 
society). 


Prometheus Rising 


135 


The Queen of Discs, or earth/water, is a mixture of first and 
second circuit traits — sensational-viscerotonic-oral and emo- 
tional-egotistic-political. You better be damned careful to call 
her Ms. 

The Prince of Discs, or earth/air, is a blend of first and third 
circuits — oral demand and rational calculation. Probably, a very 
sharp and sharkish lawyer. 

The Princess of Discs, or earth/fire is first-circuit orality 
mixed with fourth-circuit sexuality. This fusion of exhibitionism 
with enflamed eros means she's probably starring in porn 
movies. In all Disc cards, the first circuit predominates over the 
others. 

The Queen of Cups, or water/water, is emotion and territorial 
demand. Nelson Algren had her in mind when he said, "Never 
bed down with a woman who has more problems than you." 

The Knight of Cups, water/earth, is emotion plus sensation. 
The pure predator, marauder, thief, rapist or sociopath. 

The Prince of Cups or water/air is emotion plus reason. The 
humanist, humanitarian, liberal; an ideal Unitarian minister. 

The Princess of Cups is water/fire: an explosive mixture of 
egotism and sexuality. Scarlett O'Hara. Th efemmefatale. 

The Prince of Swords is air/air: all pure undiluted intellect. 
His feet never touch the earth; he lives amid floating abstrac- 
tions. The monk-scholar. 

The Knight of Swords is air/earth: reason and oral exhibition- 
ism. The actor, orator, demagogue — sometimes the artist. 

The Queen of Swords is air/water; reason plus emotion. The 
greats in science and ait are generally of this imprint group. 

The Princess of Swords is air/fire: reason and sexuality. The 
good parent; usually the Puritan, but sometimes the crusader for 
"sexual freedom." In any case, the motivating drive is an attempt 
to impose abstract reason upon the genetic imperatives of the 
mating urge. 

The Princess of Wands is fire/fire: sexuality at its most pow- 
erful. These types are usually, but not necessarily, quite promis- 
cuous; sometimes they pour all their erotic energy into one mate 
and raise huge families, parenting being a strong part of the 
fourth circuit; e.g., J.S. Bach, who may have written the sexiest 
music in history, had twenty children. 



136 


Prometheus Rising 


The Knight of Wands is fire/earth: sexuality and sensational- 
ism. The Playboy. Reich's "Phallic Narcissist." 

The Prince of Wands is fire/air: sexuality plus reason. These 
types are likely to get involved in the kind of empirical mysti- 
cism that is not tolerated by the local Authorities — e.g., the 
Tantrists in India, the Knights Templar and witches in medieval 
Europe, Aleister Crowley and Wilhelm Reich most recently. 
(Crowley said this card was a portrait of his "True Self.”) 

The Queen of Wands is fire/water: sexuality and emotional 
politics. The law courts have a steady parade of this type passing 
through every day. 

The clever Cabalists who designed this pictorial key to the 
four primitive circuits included a clue to higher consciousness. 
For they teach that each element in traditional alchemy (earth, 
air, fire, water) corresponds to one of these Tarot suits (discs, 
swords, wands, cups) and to one of the letters in the Holy 
Unspeakable Name of God — YHVH. The correspondences are 
as follows: 


Y fire 

wands 

CIRCUIT IV 

H water 

cups 

CIRCUIT II 

V air 

swords 

CIRCUIT III 

H earth 

discs 

CIRCUIT I 


The logic of this imagery is quite clear to the unconscious 
mind, and these associations appear frequently in dreams, as 
Jung documented in Psychology and Alchemy. 



Prometheus Rising 


131 



CIRCUIT I 

CIRCUIT II 

CIRCUIT III 

CIRCUIT IV 

Oral narcissist 
sensation 

Emotionalist 

feeling 

Rationalist 

reason 

Sex Role 
(missing in Jung) 

Natural Child 

Adapted Child 

Adult or 
Computer 

Parent 

Id 

Ego 

(missing in 
Freud) 

Super-ego 


The aim of the Cabala is to make the microcosm mirror the 
macrocosm"; that is, to make the human being a perfect image of 
"God." This means putting together the four "alchemical" ele- 
ments symbolized by the letters Y, H, V, H. In other words, 
bringing the four circuits into balance. 

This is the same lesson as taught in the Buddhist mandalas 
with four demons at the corners and the circle representing 
awakening in the middle. 

The "married look," "the "Mom and Dad look," etc., which 
are not scientific concepts but which everybody can recognize at 
once, have to do with an acute time-sense. The parent is con- 
cerned not just with acquiring bio-survival tickets for personal 
nurture, but with acquiring tickets for the young, and for the 
future. 

Behaviorists tell us wonderful stories about the intricate pat- 
terns that can be conditioned into experimental animals. See they 
say we have, by selective reinforcement, trained this rat so that at 
the sound of a bell, he runs up a ladder, presses button A, races 
across a plank and down another ladder, presses button B, dashes 
across the cage and waits at the food-slot for his meal to arrive. 

Lest anybody think this book is written from a perch of supe- 
riority, consider the similar, but more complex, behavior which 
the author followed for twenty years. He would set an alarm 









Prometheus Rising 


clock before sleep every night. When the alarm woke him. he 
would breakfast hurriedly, rush off to catch a bus, ride to a 
subway, change to the train, ride to an office building, rush 
through the lobby, board an elevator, ride to a certain floor, enter 
an office, and toil at repetitious (and generally pointless) tasks 
for eight hours. This behavior sequence had been shaped, as B.F. 
Skinner would say, by reinforcement delivered every second 
week in the form of bio-survival tickets (money). These tickets 
were necessary to the bio-survival of four dependent children. 

The reader of this book can probably remember, somewhat 
dimly, the imprinting and conditioning of each of these circuits. 

We all began as infants in a one-dimensional world, orally 
hooked to Mommy. The further away from Mommy we crawled, 
the greater was our bio-survival anxiety, and we generally 
returned to Mommy as quickly as possible. The key imprint 
incidents of this period, together with associated conditioning, 
determine, concretely, how much we currently exhibit of: 

ANXIETY OR SELF-CONFIDENCE 

ROOTEDNESS OR EXPLORATIYENESS 

DEPENDENCY OR INDEPENDENCE 

Then, when the DNA sent the appropriate RNA messenger 
molecules to the glands, endocrine system, etc. a mutation oc- 
curred. Our gross morphology — our whole body — changed, and 
our "minds" changed in the process. That is, our reality-tunnel 
dilated into two-dimensions, when we rose up and began to walk 
about the house, and started learning who we could dominate, 
who could dominate us, who could be dominated (emotionally 
bullied) at some times and not at others, etc. We developed out 
of amorphous bio-survival consciousness into stubborn individ- 
ual ego. We were imprinted and conditioned with a particular 
style of emotional-territorial "politics." 

At this stage we were imprinted and conditioned for: 



Prometheus Rising 


139 


DOMINANCE 

OR 

SUBMISSION 

SELF-CONFIDENCE 

OR 

SELF-DOUBT 

STRONG EGO 

OR 

WEAK EGO 

HIGH PACK STATUS 

OR 

LOW PACK STATUS 

GIVING ORDERS 

OR 

TAKING ORDERS 

“HERRENMORAL” 

OR 

“SKLAVMORAL” 


We were subsequently conditioned to switch between these 
reflexes depending on whether the person we were dealing with 
was Higher in the pecking order or Lower in the pecking order. 
(Middle-class people, e.g., Reagan conservatives, John Birchers, 
etc. will always revere those Higher in the pecking order; and, 
equally, will always have some reason to persecute — peck at — 
the poor, who are Lower in the pecking order. Hence, they will 
say and even believe, that they are being robbed by the poor on 
Welfare — who get about 4% of the tax dollar — and never 
"notice" that the military-industrial complex is getting 72% of 
their tax dollar. This is normal mammalian sociobiology.) 

After this second-circuit reality-tunnel is wired in, the organ- 
ism molts and mutates again into the verbal stage, and a third 
circuit style of mentation imprinted. That is, on top of proto- 
plasmic consciousness and mammalian ego, we acquire human 
mind, which is created by and creator of human artifacts and 
speech. 

Feral children, who survived in isolation from human society 
(artifacts and speech), have no "mind" in the human sense; 
which is why they are called feral. 

In the semantic stage of imprint vulnerability we acquire 
either: 

FLUENCY OR INARTICULATENESS 

DEXTERITY OR CLUMSINESS 

"GOOD MIND" OR "DUMB MIND ” 1 


Why do we say "dumb" (mute) for stupid? Because "a good mind 
means a good mouth," and the human mind is a verbalizing circuit. 



140 


Prometheus Rising 


At puberty, another DNA trigger fires and RNA messengers 
initiate another morphological mutation of body-mind. The 
"adult personality" is imprinted and conditioned. We become: 


"MORAL'' 

OR 

"IMMORAL" 

ROBOT-OBEDIENT 

OR 

ROBOT-DISOBEDIENT 

SOLID CITIZEN 

OR 

SEXUAL OUTLAW 

"PARENT" 

OR 

ANARCHIST 


Lack of understanding of these morphological changes, and 
their persistence in imprint circuits in the brain, is responsible for 
most failures in communication, and for the general sense of 
exasperation with which we too often confront each other. Since 
everybody's imprints are a little bit different — the average is that 
which nobody totally is 1 — we all feel at times like the legendary 
Quaker who told his wife, "All the world is mad but me and thee, 
and sometimes I wonder about thee." 

Reichians, disciples of Dr. Spock and the Summerhill School, 
etc. have called attention, with some impatience, to the brutality 
and stupidity of many of our traditional child-rearing methods. 
These methods are "brutal" and "stupid" only if, like the above- 
mentioned heretics, one regards the goal of child-rearing as the 
production of a sane, balanced, creative [NOT CRATED] human 
being. THIS HAS NEVER BEEN THE GOAL OF ANY SOCIETY 
IN THE REAL WORLD. The traditional childrearing methods are 
quite logical, pragmatic and sound in fulfilling the real puipose 
of society, which is not to create an ideal person, but to create 
[CRATE] a semi-robot who mimics the society as closely as 
possible — both in its rational and its irrational aspects, both as 
the repository of the wisdom of the past and as the sum total of 
all the cruelties and stupidities of the past. Very simply, a totally 
aware, alert, awakened (unbrainwashed) person would not fit 
very well into any of the standard roles society offers; the dam- 
aged, robotized products of traditional child-rearing do fit into 
those slots. 


1 James Joyce justified anarchism on the grounds that "the state is 
concentric and the individual is eccentric." 



Prometheus Rising 


141 

That is, there is a neuro-sociological "logic" to the illogical. 
Are traditional schools very much like mini-prisons? Do they 
stifle imagination, cramp the child physically and mentally, and 
run on various forms of overt or covert terrorism? Of course, the 
answer is an unambiguous yes; but such schools are necessary to 
train people for roles in the ordinary office or factory or profes- 
sion, which are also very much like mini-prisons, stifle imagina- 
tion, cramp the person physically and mentally and run on terror 
(threat of loss of bio-survival tickets, in the form of pay-checks 
or tenure). 

The permissive movement in child-rearing appeared only 
when it did, and has succeeded only to a limited extent, because 
society has always needed and still thinks it needs human robots. 
Utopian child-rearing will advance further, necessarily, only as 
society itself evolves out of authoritarianism. That is, as the 
accelerated changes now occurring propel us into the most rapid 
period of social evolution in all human history, we will then need 
citizens who are not robots, who are creative; who are not 
docile, who are innovative; who are not narrow-minded bigots, 
who are explorers in every sense of the word. 

Traditional child-rearing began to falter only when society 
began to enter into the present period of accelerated change and 
technological omni-transformation of all traditional values. 

Failures in communication generally derive from sending a 
message to the wrong address. That is, your husband has an ego 
problem and you send a message to his mind. Adapting a 
diagram from Transactional Analysis what has happened is this: 



IV Parent 

III Adult or Computer 
II Adapted Child 
I 


Natural Child 



142 


Prometheus Rising 


The message is addressed from Circuit I to Circuit IV. It 
means "I feel weak; help bolster me up." If the answer comes 
back from Circuit III to Circuit III, "Well, let's analyze the 
problem. . there has been a Wrong Address. 

Of course, this example is deliberately untypical, although not 
impossible. It is untypical because women traditionally are 
trained not to make this kind of mistake — to be "emotionally 
sensitive," to be "supportive," etc. It is much more likely, statis- 
tically;, that this kind of Wrong Address will go the other way — 
husband to wife. That is, the wife signals "Help!" and the 
husband on Circuit III says, "Let's analyze the problem..." 

We have said that the imprinting of the circuits contains a 
large element of accident (within genetic parameters). Society, 
everywhere, without understanding this theory, understands 
enough pragmatically about imprinting processes to attempt to 
program each individual for his or her assigned role. Hence, 
traditional girl-rearing is different from traditional boy-rearing, 
so that women will have more Circuit II "sensitivity." Again 
Women's Liberation, like modem child-rearing, arrived only 
when we were evolutionarily ready or nearly-ready for it. The 
traditional system worked in traditional societies. 

Similarly, class structure, like the caste structure in an insect 
hive, works to produce the "right" imprints in each class. The 
third circuit of the servile class or proletariat is imprinted chiefly 
for manual dexterity, while the same circuit in middle-class or 
ruling-class children is imprinted for verbal, mathematical or 
other symbol-using skills 

Democracy has been less than a total success — and the intel- 
lectual's half-shamed cynicism about democracy is justified — to 
the extent that traditional society did not need, could not use, and 
in many ways discouraged the development of high verbal 
("rational") skills in the majority of the population. That is, 
concretely, most people are not encouraged to be very smart, and 
are rather heavily programmed to be comparatively stupid. Such 
programming is what is needed to fit them into most traditional 
jobs. Their bio-survival circuitry works as well as that of most 
animals, their emotional-territorial circuitry is typically primate, 
and they have little third-circuit "mind" to verbalize (rationalize) 
with. Naturally, they usually vote for the charlatan who can 



Prometheus Rising 


143 


activate primitive bio-survival fears and territorial ("patriotic") 
pugnacity. The intellectual looks at the dismal results and contin- 
ues to believe in "democracy" only by an act of Blind Faith 
similar to the way beliefs in Catholicism or Communism or 
snake-worship are maintained. 

Again, the traditional system works, for traditional society. A 
mass made of people who have intense curiosity about why 
Beethoven went in for string quartets after the Ninth Symphony, 
or whether Kant really refuted Hume satisfactorily, or what the 
latest quantum theories mean in relation to Determinism and 
Free Will, is not a mass that will easily be led into dull, dehu- 
manizing labor at traditional jobs. 

Why did Adlai Stevenson lose to Ike Eisenhower, George 
McGovern to Tricky Dicky Nixon, etc.? It was the Wrong 
Address problem again. Stevenson, McGovern and other darlings 
of the intelligentsia were speaking to the third circuit, which is 
not very highly developed in most domesticated primates yet. 
Eisenhower in his Fatherly way, and Nixon in his bullying Big 
Brother way, knew just how to push the right Second-Circuit 
emotional-territorial buttons to get a mob of primates to follow 
them. They were genetically programmed alpha males, in etho- 
logical terms. 

Similarly, the Moralist (i.e., the Adult Personality who has 
imprinted heavy Ethical imperatives on Circuit IV) is often total- 
ly unable to communicate with the scientist or technologist. The 
Moralist may even decide — many already have — that the scien- 
tist per se is "inhuman." In fact, morals are fairly irrelevant to 
the Third Circuit analytical mind, which is the brain function the 
average scientist has imprinted most powerfully. To the third 
circuit, the only morality is accuracy, the only immorality is 
sloppy thinking. 

Again, the rise in "social conscience" among scientists is hap- 
pening only when it was evolutionarily necessary that it happen, 
i.e., after Hiroshima. If it doesn't seem to be happening widely 
enough and quickly enough, well, the same can be said — also in 
error, I think — about modernizing education and childrearing, 
about Women's Liberation, about racism, etc. The rebellion 
against all the follies of the past is succeeding, and will continue 
to succeed, only as we evolve into a society which needs each 



144 


Prometheus Rising 


human to function well on all circuits. We are moving with ever- 
increasing speed, into such a society. 

What the impatient radical forgets is that many of the 
"injustices" of the traditional primate society were not even 
perceived as such by the best minds of 1000 years ago or 100 
years ago, or in the case of institutionalized sexism, even 30 
years ago. If we can see injustice and absurdity in many age-old 
institutions, it is only because we are evolving out of robothood, 
at precisely the point in evolution when it is necessary for us to 
become smarter and more sensitive on all circuits. 

Each of us has a "favorite" circuit — that is, a circuit that has 
been more heavily imprinted than the others. Miscommunication, 
misunderstanding and general misjudgment of one another is 
vastly increased by the fact that few of us know about these 
levels of circuitry, and we all tend to assume that the person we 
are interacting with is on the same circuit we are. 

Thus, there are narcissistic (oral) first-circuit types in every 
social group. Present them with a problem and they will imme- 
diately look for somebody else to handle it, since the oral stage is 
robotically imprinted for dependency. (Or, if they have imprinted 
hostile weakness instead of dependent weakness, they will 
explode into anger — infantile tantrum — raging that a problem 
exists and that it has been imposed on them.) 

A second-circuit type, in the same situation, will attempt to 
frighten the problem away by barking and blustering at it, 
mammalian-fashion. 

A third-circuit type will try to reason out the problem. This is 
the best approach only with problems that are themselves ratio- 
nal, i.e., "How do you make this machine work?" It can be blind, 
and futile, when the "problem" is another human being acting 
out one of the more destructive second-circuit rage programs. 

("The liberal is the one who leaves the room when the fight 
starts," somebody once said. Third-circuit types are most con- 
fused and feel impotent when second-circuit mammalian politics 
takes over the scene.) 

A fourth-circuit type will try to be rational (third circuit) and 
to sense the emotional dimensions of the problem (second 
circuit) but will basically try to impose a moral solution: "Now 
this is the decent, fair thing to do. . .” This may or may not make 



Prometheus Rising 


145 


sense to the third-circuit Rationalist, looking for objective 
justice; and it will usually make no sense at all to the totally 
second-circuit type dominated by emotionalism and territoriality. 

What is true of the group is true of the individual. While we 
all have our favorite circuit, and tend to see that circuit as 
"superior" to all the others, we can be pushed out of it by shocks 
or stresses, in which case we jump to another circuit. 

The most robotic Rationalist will descend to the first circuit, 
eventually, if threat to bio-security is forcibly enough presented 
on the screen of consciousness. And, if prevented from "leaving 
the room when the fight starts," the Rationalist will even descend 
to second-circuit mammalian howling and barking, under suffi- 
cient pressure. (Oliver Wendell Holmes referred to this as "the 
hydrostatic principle in controversy," whereby the fools drag 
everybody down to their own level.) 

The most robotic Emotionalist may also move up to the third 
circuit, temporarily, if a problem remains intractable to every 
form of emotional bullying or con-artistry. 

All of us will move into fourth-circuit Parent role or Super 
Ego — even little children will do it, imitatively — if it seems that 
the only way to get what one wants is to appeal to tribal morality: 
"Why, it would be positively, indecent not to do it the way 
Grandfather would. . .“ 

"Give us the child until he is five, and we will have him for 
life," bragged some 18th Century Jesuit. The Jesuit order of that 
time, as Aldous Huxley later noted sardonically, educated 
Voltaire, Diderot, and the Marquis de Sade; obviously their tech- 
niques of brain-programming were not perfect. Nonetheless, 
most people in most societies do grow up as fairly accurate repli- 
cas of the previous generation. Most children educated by the 
Jesuits have remained Catholics. Most children of Democrats do 
not become Republicans. Etc. 

Considering the wide variety of philosophies available to any 
of us — nudism and Buddhism, scientific materialism and snake 
worship. Communism and vegetarianism, subjective Idealism 
and Existentialism, Methodism and Shinto, etc. — the fact that 
most people remain in the same reality-tunnel as their parents, 
does indicate that acculturalization is a mind control process. We 
are all giants, raised by pygmies, who have learned to walk with 



146 


Prometheus Rising 


a perpetual mental crouch. Unleashing our full stature — our total 
brain power — is what this book is all about. 

There is a Zen story (very funny — ha-ha) about a monk who, 
having failed to achieve "enlightenment" (brain-change) through 
the normal Zen methods, was told by his teacher to think of 
nothing but an ox. Day after day after day, the monk thought of 
the ox, visualized the ox, meditated on the ox. Finally, one day, 
the teacher came to the monk's cell and said, "Come out here — I 
want to talk to you." 

"1 can't get out," the monk said. "My horns won't fit through 
the door." 

/ can’t get out... 

At these words, the monk was "enlightened." Never mind 
what "enlightenment" means, right now. The monk went through 
some species of brain change, obviously. He had developed the 
delusion that he was an ox, and awakening from that hypnoidal 
state he saw through the mechanism of all other delusions and 
how they robotize us. 


EXERCIZES 

1 . Recreate vividly in imagination your first orgasm. To what 
extent do you still use the same accessories (stimuli) to turn you 
on? 

2. Try to change your sexual imprint. See if you can reach 
orgasm by some method that has been taboo or unthinkable to 
you before. 

3. Imagine that you are Rev. Jerry Falwell. Explain to an 
imaginary homosexual why his sexual imprint is "sinful" and 
should be changed at once. Include instructions on how to 
change it. 

4. Imagine that you are a Gay man or Lesbian. Explain to 
Rev. Falwell why you will not or can not change your sexual 
imprint to please him. 

5. Read Margaret Mead’s Sex and Temperament in Three 
Primitive Societies. Then write a five-page proof that the taboos 
in our tribe make more sense objectively than the taboos of the 
tribes she studied. Be serious about it! 



Prometheus Rising 


I4J 


6. Choose the viewpoint of the Samoans in Dr. Mead's book 
above. Write a five-page proof that their taboos make more sense 
than those of our society. Be serious about it. 

7. Re-read the paragraphs about the giraffe and the gosling. 
What does this tell you about your sexual imprint? What is your 
jeep or your ping-pong ball? 




CHAPTER NINE 


MINDWASHING & BRAIN 
PROGRAMMING 


We have certain preconceived notions about location in space 
which have come down to us from ape-like ancestors. 

— Sir Arthur Eddington, Space, Time and Gravitation 



149 




The greatest Utopian possibility before us is also the greatest 
dystopian terror. 

We are learning more and more about the pragmatics of brain 
change: how to alter anybody's brain so as to set them in a total- 
ly new "reality." Visions of 1984 and Brave New World lurk in 
this very concept. 

But we are also learning how to change our own brains — 
learning to use them for fun and profit rather than for misery and 
robothood. Visions of Super-Humanity are implicit in any per- 
ception of what this means. 

The brain can be tuned, like a TV, to turn off any channel, and 
to bring in a new channel. This is what the veterans of the 1960s- 
1970s Neurological Revolution know. This is the major threat, 
and the major promise of our time. 

Consider the alternatives. 

CYANIDE AND SYNCHRONICITY 

In November 1978, I was in Seattle to see the 10-hour play 
which Ken Campbell had made out of the three Illuminatus! 
novels by Bob Shea and myself. In the course of the drama came 
a scene Shea and I had almost forgotten writing in the seven 
years since the books were finished in 1971. The scene con- 
cerned a lunatic messiah who orders 3300 of his robot disciples 
to commit suicide by drinking cyanide. The mindless automatons 
obey and each drinks his cyanide cocktail. 

Shea and I had written that bizarre sequence to illustrate the 
extremes to which brainwashing can go. We both regarded it as 
an extravagant fantasy, for satirical purposes — an exaggeration 
of our serious theme. 

Yet while the actors on the stage were depicting this "fantasy" 
every TV and newspaper in the land was discussing the exact 
same species of mass zombie behavior. Our fictional maniac 
guru was Adolph Hitler; in November 1978, while our play was 
being performed, another maniac-guru, Jim Jones, had played the 
whole sequence out in reality. In Guyana, he had ordered 900 of 
his robots to drink cyanide and they had all obeyed. 

It was particularly interesting to me that Jones had staged his 
Gotterdammerung while our play was having its American 



152 


Prometheus Rising 


premiere. It was even more interesting that the tool of mass 
suicide, in our fiction and in Jones’ reality, had been cyanide. 

Carl Jung, the psychologist, and Wolfgang Pauli, the physi- 
cist, had a name for peculiar coincidences of that order of eeri- 
ness. They called them synchronicities and said they represented 
an acausal and/or holistic principle in nature that acts outside the 
linear past-present-future of Newtonian time. 

Pauli, like most quantum physicists, was aware that subatomic 
events cannot be understood in Newtonian terms and must 
require some sort of acausality (indeterminism) or holism (super- 
determinism) to explain them. In either case , the distinction 
between "observer" and "observed" breaks down. (About that, 
more later.) 

Jung, in turn, had observed that such synchronicities — weird 
coincidences — tend to occur when certain deep structures in the 
psyche are activated. He assumed that these structures were at 
what he called "the psychoid level," below the collective uncon- 
scious, where mind and matter are not yet distinct — the quantum 
foam out of which matter and form and consciousness hierarchi- 
cally emerge. 

Wait. It gets weirder..; * 

HEIRESS TO BANK ROBBER 

When Patty Hearst was kidnapped by the Symbionese Liber- 
ation Army on February 4, 1974, she was a "normal" young 
heiress. She was attending a normal college, had a normal live-in 
boyfriend and smoked a normal amount of weed for a young 
heiress of that time. 57 days later, she had become a new person, 
with a new name — Tania — and was living in a new reality- 
tunnel. 

Where Patty had been heterosexual, Tania was bisexual. 
Where Patty largely accepted the Hearst family tunnel-reality 
with only a few "liberal" modifications typical of her age group, 
Tania was a violent and fanatic revolutionary. Where Patty had 
been respectful to her parents, Tania denounced them as 
"corporate liars" and castigated them as being involved in a 
capitalist plot to "murder" the poor people of the U.S. "down to 
the last man, woman and child." Where Patty had been "nice" 



Prometheus Rising 


153 


and polite and certainly non-violent, Tania had her photo taken 
holding a tommy-gun and assisted in at least one bank robbery 
and perhaps other felonies. 

What had happened? When Patty-Tania was captured and 
brought to trial, the defense claimed that she had been 
"brainwashed." The jury either did not understand or did not 
believe this; they sentenced Patty to prison for the crimes Tania 
had committed. Debate about this case continues to the present, 
since some people think Ms. Hearst was "responsible" for the 
consciousness change she underwent while held captive by the 
SLA and others are just as sure she was not "responsible." 

Leaving metaphysical questions of "responsibility" aside for a 
moment, it seems obvious that a young lady of Hearst’ s class and 
background would almost certainly not have taken up bank 
robbing if she had not first been kidnapped and incorporated by 
the SLA. 

Since the SLA called itself an army, let us compare it to an 
army; this may prove illuminating. 

One does not get kidnapped into an army the way Hearst got 
kidnapped into the SLA, but the process is not entirely dissimi- 
lar. U.S. Army recruiters do not break into a young man's house 
in the middle of night with guns, as the SLA did with Patty: they 
simply send the young man a notice in the mail. Nonetheless 
coercion is there; the young draftee knows that if he ignores the 
letter, government agents will be around to seize his body in a 
short while, (unless he flees the country.) He will then either go 
into the army or into jail. Thus, whether we are speaking about 
the S.L. Army or the U.S. Army, the subject is reduced to infan- 
tile helplessness: other people are deciding what is to be done to 
his or her body. One is pushed to the neonate position of being 
one foot high in a six foot tall world, as it were. Like the small 
child, one is learning that the first rule of survival is to obey. 

Most people (except nudists) are shy about appearing naked 
in public — and this is the most common of all nightmares, 
"There 1 was with no clothes on!” (Joyce made this the central 
incident in the dream that is all dreams, Finnegans Wake.) The 
first step in leaving the civilian reality-tunnel and being initiated 
into the Army reality-tunnel is, thus, the physical examination, in 
which the subject is stripped naked and made to march around a 



Prometheus Rising 


large building with other naked victims while the fully-clothed 
Army personnel give the briefest possible orders: "Stand up. Sit 
down. Go there. Come back here," etc. The Masonic initiation, 
which only removes part of the clothing of the subject, is a 
milder version of the stripping away of previously secure social 
parameters. 

What is really being "stripped away" is more subtle; it is the 
whole social system in which one has lived before being 
snatched by a U.S. or an S.L. Army. When the doctor tells the 
naked draftee, "Bend over. Spread your cheeks," so-called 
normal reality has ended as totally as if the victim had been 
incorporated into a surrealist movie. If an employer becomes too 
obnoxious, one can always find a new job. You cannot walk out 
on the U.S. or S.L. Army that way, because acute first-circuit 
helplessness is being imprinted. 

When the Russian mathematician, Ouspensky, was first 
studying with Gurdjieff, he had great trouble understanding 
Gurdjieffs insistence that most people are machines and totally 
unaware of the objective world around them. Then, one day, 
after World War I had begun, Ouspensky saw a truck full of 
artificial legs. These artificial legs were being sent to the front- 
line hospitals, for soldiers whose legs had not even been blown 
off yet, but whose legs would be blown off. The prediction that 
these legs would be blown off was so certain that the artificial 
legs were already on their way to replace the natural legs. The 
prediction was based on the mathematical certainty that millions 
of young men would march to the front, to be maimed and mur- 
dered, as mindlessly as cattle marching into a slaughterhouse. 

In a flash, Ouspensky understood the mechanical nature of 
ordinary human consciousness. 

( "lean 't get out — my horns won 7 fitthrough the door. ”) 

Initiation into the "Manson family" is not dissimilar. Lynette 
Fromme was much like Patty Hearst — a "normal" American 
young woman, with less money than Hearst, but no special 
proclivity for criminal behavior. After passing through General 
Manson’ s basic training, Lynette had become Squeaky Fromme 
and was convicted for pointing a gun at the U.S. President with 
seeming intent to assassinate him. 



Prometheus Rising 


155 


In the next chapter we will explain further how being captured 
("drafted") by an army is the model of all brainwashing experi- 
ence. 

Human society as a whole is a vast brainwashing machine 
whose semantic rules and sex roles create a social robot. 

The concept of "washing" is, of course, unscientific and 
crude. The brain is not a dirty garment but an electro-colloidal 
information processor — a living network of over 110 billion 
nerve cells capable of ( 10 2 ’ 733 '° 00 ) interconnections, a number 
higher than the total of all the atoms in the universe. In this 
elegant, micro-miniaturized biocomputer more than 100,000,000 
processes are programmed every minute. 

From the viewpoint of neuro-sociology, how I perceive 
"myself and "my world" depends on how each circuit has been 
wired in my brain. Society has always known how to wire chil- 
dren; the process is called acculturalization; it explains why chil- 
dren of Catholics tend to become Catholics, children of Samoans 
fit into Samoan society, children of Communists become good 
little Communists, etc. Each generation "brainwashes" the next. 

Christianity, Buddhism and Islam, between them, are the most 
potent brain-programming institutions on this planet. Approxi- 
mately half the art and philosophy of the human race — the archi- 
tecture, the music, the paintings, the literature, the educational 
ideals, the "great ideas” — has been influenced by and/or nurtured 
by these three great systems of theology. This is not to denigrate 
the contributions of Confucianism, Judaism, Hinduism, modern 
science, etc., but merely to emphasize the extent to which the 
higher civilizations have been shaped by the four creators of 
these three omni-religions: Buddha, Mohammed, Jesus and St. 
Paul. What did these four men have in common? 

As Aleister Crowley points out, "No point of doctrine, no 
point of ethics, no theory of a ‘hereafter’ do they share, and yet 
in the history of their lives we find one identity amid many 
diversities." 

Buddha was an ordinary Hindu nobleman, and then he 
experienced a rapid brain-change, after which he became a great 
Teacher. 

Mohammed was a humble camel-driver, with no sign of 
exceptional intelligence or ambition, and then he experienced a 



I §6 Prometheus Rising 

rapid brain change, after which he became Teacher, Conqueror, 
Law-Maker and Prophet. 

We hear nothing of Jesus (save a few fables) until the age of 
30, when he experiences a rapid brain-change, and puts forth a 
doctrine that is to overturn the Roman Empire and influence 
Western Civilization until the present. 

St. Paul, who took the teaching of Jesus and turned it into a 
militant movement, suffered an extreme form of brain-change, of 
which he tells us that he was temporarily struck blind and lifted 
up into the heavens where he beheld things "of which it is not 
lawful to speak." 

On all else but the experience of Illumination they disagree. 
Buddha insisted that his enlightenment was perfectly natural — 

"Are you a God?" he was once asked. 

"No." 

"Are you a saint?" 

"No.” 

"Then what are you?" 

"I am awake." 

Mohammed informs us that he "spoke" to the Angel Gabriel, 
Jesus that the "Father which is in heaven" spoke through him, 
and St. Paul that he saw the lights and wonders above mentioned. 

Making every possible reservation about fable and myth, we 
get this one coincidence: A nobody experiences rapid brain- 
change (consciousness dilation) and abruptly becomes very 
much a historical Somebody. Much of the human race is still 
living on the legacy of these four bio-electrical "illuminations," 
for good and for ill. 

Most people (the present author included) would consider 
what happened to Patty Hearst "bad" and what happened to 
Buddha "good." It needs to be emphasized that both the "bad" 
and the "good" brain change experiences are functionally the 
same. The process is modeled, on a small scale by any design 
such as the following: 



Prometheus Rising 


157 



If you have seen this only one way, look at it again. There are 
two opposite ways of seeing it. 

When your whole world, not just a design on a book-page, is 
transformed this way, you are experiencing the kind of brain- 
change that can turn a rich heiress into a bank robber, an obscure 
carpenter into a Messiah, or an ordinary bank teller into a mental 
patient... 

Similar forms of major brain-change underlie all revolution- 
ary breakthroughs in the arts, and in science as well. Neuro- 
sociology is a history of massive brain changes, as we quantum- 
jumped from "tribal" reality to "feudal" reality, from "feudal" 
reality to "industrial" reality, and now are jumping to Future 
Reality. 

Consider the revolution against death, if you think you 
haven't been brainwashed. 

Not all people have accepted mortality. Mystics, of course, 
have always insisted there is a species of "spiritual" immortality, 
but aside from that, Taoists in China and alchemists in Europe 
spent hundreds of years seeking the elixir of life that would 
allow for physical immortality. Paracelsus, for instance, left 
behind some of his sperm with directions to a student on how to 
revive or recreate him out of it. (He seems to have had a crude 
and inaccurate idea of cloning.) In the 1780s, both Benjamin 
Franklin and Condorcet, in America and France, wrote that 
medical science would eventually conquer death along with 
every other disease. 

The modern immortalist movement began with physicist 
R.C.W. Ettinger who published The Prospect of Immortality in 
1964. Ettinger, who had entered a reality-tunnel different from 
the imprinted consensus-reality of our tribe, said bluntly that we 
could be the generation that abolished death and we should start 
working for that goal. 



Prometheus Rising 


158 

Since then, research on life-extension and longevity has quan- 
tum jumped rapidly. Numerous books have come forth carrying 
the same basic message as Ettinger's. Among them have been: 

The Biological Time Bomb, Taylor, 1968 

The Immortalist, Harrington, 1969 

The Immortality Factor, Segerberg, 1973 

Here Comes Immortality, Tucille, 1974 

Prolongevity, Rosenfeld, 1976 

No More Dying, Kurtzman, 1978 

The Life Extension Revolution, Kent, 1980 

Dozens of societies have been founded for anti-aging 
research, to lobby for more research, or just to publicize the 
possibility before us — the enormous evolutionary j ump from 
mortality to immortality. Among these groups are: Committee 
for the Elimination of Death, San Marcos, CA.; Bay Area 
Cryonics Society, San Francisco, CA; Prometheus Society, 
Baltimore, MD.; Long Life, Chicago, IL.; Alcor Foundation, San 
Diego, CA; Foundation for Research Against Disease and Death, 
New York, NY, etc. Now consider the cover of a recent book on 
this topic: Conquest of Death Alvin Silverstein, Ph.D. The front 
jacket says, in bold type but timid words: 

A Controversial Look at the Revolution in Medicine and 
Why We May Be the Last Generation to Die 

Note the pessimistic implications: immortality is coming, but 
not for me and you. We are still condemned to death. Our horns 
won’t fit through the door. 

This fatalistic version of Dr. Silverstein's message must have 
seemed necessary to the publishers because they felt that saying 
we don't have to die would be too shocking to the ordinary 
reader. What? You and I live forever? Nonsense! Our reality- 
tunnels have all been imprinted to end with the dying of the light. 

Inside the jacket, a more accurate version of what Dr. Silver- 
stein is saying appears: 


We Need Not Be the Last Generation to Die — 
We Can Conquer Death in Our Time 



Prometheus Rising 


159 


Evidently, putting this on the front of the book would have 
been too much of a "Neurological Revolution" for the average 
reader — at least in the publisher’s estimation. 

One has to reach page 189 of the book to find Dr. Silver- 
stein’s own estimate of the probable chronology of immortality, 
which is: 


GOOD NEWS FOLKS 

c. 1983 We begin to halt the aging process 

c. 1989 Life span prolonged indefinitely 

c. 1999 Conquest of disease and death 

Well, he was over-optimistic: but we've definitely reached the 
first step (1997). 

Who told you that you had to die? Were they any more infal- 
lible than the people who programmed Patty Hearst, etc.? 

“But — but — the Immortalists are only a minority...” (So were 
the Einsteinians in 1910.) 

“But — but — Reverend Jones told me to drink the cyanide and 
he knows what's right..." 

“But — but my horns won't fit through the door... 

EXERCIZES 

1 . Imagine yourself into the reality-tunnel of the far-right 
group known as the John Birch Society. Believe for a while that 
the U.S. government is 85% under covert United Nations (UN) 
control and an open UN dictatorship will be declared soon. Turn 
on the TV in that frame of mind and lookfor all the evidence that 
each newscaster is either a conscious or an unconscious dupe of 
the UN conspiracy. 

2. Imagine yourself into the Head Space of a dogmatic Ratio- 
nalist. Analyze the Jim Jones-cyanide-///wm/rnjm.ssynchronicity 
as "mere coincidence." 

3. Imagine yourself into the Head Space of an occultist. 
Analyze the hm-lones-cyamde-Illuminatus synchronicity as an 
Omen. What does it mean? Jungians say synchronicities contain 
"messages" from the deep structure of the collective mind. What 
is the message ? 



i6o 


Prometheus Rising 


4. Enter the Immortalist head-space for a few minutes. Imag- 
ine you invest only $1000 at normal bank interest, compounded 
annually. What will you have in 100 years? In 200 years? 
(Nobody has used this conservative path to investment and 
gotten rich on it before because nobody has lived long enough.) 

5. Why are you not a nudist (if you aren’t)? Make up five 
good reasons, then go find a nudist and explain them to her (or 
him). 

6. Become a Nazi for thirty three minutes. Believe that all 
politics is a matter of strength, stealth and treachery: that all 
liberalism is hypocrisy or folly. Plan a campaign to take over the 
world by force and fraud. 

7. Go to a Fundamentalist revival meeting where faith-heal- 
ings are performed. Or watch Jerry Falwell on TV. Remember 
all the time that Jim Jones started out with that routine. See if 
you can get into the head space of the Believers and decide 
whether or not they would drink cyanide if their HOFY MAN 
told them to. 



CHAPTER TEN 


HOW TO BRAIN-WASH 
FRIENDS & ROBOTIZE 
PEOPLE 


There is no government, no industrial-military complex, no eco- 
nomic system, no mass media that can ever reduce us to puppets 
and robots as thoroughly as the biological and environmental dicta- 
torships have. 

— F.M. Esfandiary, Upwingers 






As noted earlier, when the bio-survival circuit flashes danger, all 
other mental activity ceases. 

There is no "time" on the bio-survival circuit; reflexes act 
without emotional ego, rational mind or adult personality partici- 
pating: "I just found myself doing it." 

All the martial arts — judo, akido, kung fu, etc. — are reim- 
printing techniques for the bio-survival circuit. They are intended 
to ensure that what happens mechanically ("without thought") 
really does serve bio-survival, since the reflexes imprinted acci- 
dentally on this circuit are not that dependable. 

The mechanical nature of the bio-survival circuit is of key 
importance in brainwashing. To create a new imprint, reduce the 
victim to an infantile state, i.e., first-circuit vulnerability. 

As pointed out in the last chapter an army begins this process 
with the draft notice, which informs the subject that his body no 
longer belongs to him but to the government. The S.L. Army, 
seeking quicker brain change, began the conversion of Patty into 
Tania by taking her at gun point, but the message was the same: 
"We can do what we want with your body from now on." First- 
circuit bio-survival instincts thus become hooked to obeying 
those who have this awesome power-— just as the infant learns to 
hook its bio-survival circuitry to the parental figures. 

Patty’s ride in the trunk of a car (after being taken at gun- 
point) is a classic rebirth ritual; the trunk is even womb-like in its 
contours. When the trunk opened, she was reborn into a new 
reality-tunnel, that of her captors. Similarly, where the earliest 
forms of masonic initiation survive and have not been diluted 
(Note the Adeptus Major Ritual in the Complete Golden Dawn 
System of Magic, by Israel Regardie, Falcon Press 1983.) the 
candidate is thrown into a well, and then "raised" as a newborn 
Freemason. Total submersion, the form of baptism preferred by 
Protestant fundamentalists, imitates this, but without the real 
anxiety that made traditional masonry and the SLA so effective 
as brain change agents. 

All brainwashers empirically know (without in most cases 
ever having read Leary's eight-circuit model of the brain) that 
the oral bio-survival circuit seeks bonding with a mothering fig- 
ure. To increase panic and imprint vulnerability, then, the 
subject, after being seized by the brainwashers (U.S. or S.L. 
Army, "secret police," or whoever they may be in a given case) 



164 


Prometheus Rising 


is isolated from all those to whom bonding had previously been 
established. The draftee is sent to boot camp and sees no loved 
ones (wife, girlfriend, parents, etc.) for a number of weeks or 
months. The political prisoner is thrown into a dungeon. Patty 
Hearst was locked in a closet as soon as she was "rebirthed" out 
of the trunk of the car. 

Experiments in isolation by the U.S. Marine Corps, Dr. John 
Lilly and others — and the records of shipwrecked sailors, as 
summarized by Lilly in Simulations of God — show that only a 
few hours of pure isolation may be necessary before halluci- 
nations begin. These hallucinations, like those of psychedelic 
drugs, indicate the breaking down of previous imprints and the 
onset of vulnerability to new imprints. 

The need to bond the bio-survival circuit to somebody (or 
some thing) is indicated by the giraffe who imprinted on the 
hunter's jeep as a mother-substitute. Similarly, children without 
siblings, especially those in remote rural areas, often invent 
imaginary playmates, which can become "real" enough to 
frighten the parents into suspecting the onset of psychosis. Dr. 
Lilly's records of sailors and explorers in isolation show that 
such "guides," "companions" or "holy guardian angels" reappear 
quickly even in adulthood when normal social contact is 
removed. They also come promptly to those undergoing the 
mysterious state called "near-death" or "out of body experience," 
(e.g., when the heart stops on the operating table.) 

The first human being who appears to the subject after this 
isolation can easily become bonded as the mother-substitute, or, 
next best, as a father-substitute. This explains why people held 
prisoner by terrorists (e.g., on hijacked airplanes) often develop a 
"paradoxical" sympathy for those who are threatening to kill 
them. It also explains why the draftee begins to look on his kid- 
nappers as protectors as well as captors, and why the brainwash 
victim begins to please, gratify and eventually "respect" the 
brainwasher. 

In all cases, since the bio-survival circuit is keyed to nourish- 
ment. those who bring food become possible subjects for bond- 
ing. The political prisoner, the draftee, the subject kidnapped by 
terrorists, all move somewhat closer to identification/bonding 
with their captors as they are fed regularly. Again, this is 



Prometheus Rising 165 

imitated crudely by various religions (without the terror that 
creates true imprint vulnerability) by following baptism/rebirth 
rituals with a communal meal or Holy Eucharist. 

Adaptations of these principles can be applied even to those 
who walk into the brainwashing environment voluntarily at first, 
as in People's Temple, the Manson Family, and similar organi- 
zations. The first step, once the victim is inside the territory 
(commune), is to begin isolation by cutting off all communica- 
tion with the outer world and its conflicting reality-tunnels. 
Meanwhile, a parental-protective atmosphere is quickly created 
(sometimes called "love -bombing") mdfood is provided. 

Whether the subject has entered voluntarily as in these com- 
munes, or has been kidnapped or arrested (as in police states), 
the next stage is to break down the second-circuit emotional- 
territorial imprints. That means that the subject continues to be 
fed (maintaining first-circuit oral dependence) while the second- 
circuit ego is attacked in every manner possible. A point-by- 
point comparison of the techniques of a Synanon "gamer" and 
U.S. Army drill sergeant, for instance, would show astonishing 
similarities, since the basic message is dozens and dozens of 
variations on "You are all wrong. We are all right. It is extremely 
unlikely that somebody as wrong as you will become right, ever, 
but we will try to teach you." The anal vocabulary of territorial 
status is, of course, employed extensively. The ideal subject may 
almost forget his or her name and become conditioned to answer- 
ing to "You asshole, come here." 

The sense of bottom dog helplessness can be escalated by 
periodic doses of real terror. One of Charlie Manson’ s famous 
sayings was "Fear is the great teacher," and every brainwasher 
would agree ardently. In communist countries (as dramatized in 
Costa-Gravas's fine and factual film, The Confession) a favorite 
trick is to take the subject out of his cell, march him to a court- 
yard, place a noose about his neck, and convince him he is about 
to be hanged. The relief, when this turns out to be a bluff, creates 
ideal imprint vulnerability. A variation in my novel Illuminatus! 
has the victim persuaded he has been poisoned, dumped in a cof- 
fin and the lid slammed upon him. Those who have been initiated 
as Mark Master Freemasons will recognize at once that the same 
technique is the "mark that you will carry to your grave." 



166 


Prometheus Rising 


Among the Zuni Indians, the male at adolescence is kid- 
napped by masked "demons" who carry him away from the tribe 
(away from mother and other imprinted security figures.) He is 
dragged out into the desert and threatened with whips. Then the 
masks come off, revealing his maternal uncles, and in that 
moment of imprint vulnerability the tribal "secrets" (the local 
reality-tunnel) are explained in a way that leave an indelible 
mark on his consciousness. Similar rites of passage are found in 
all tribes, few as cleverly designed as this one. Symbolic and 
diluted versions survive in Bar Mitzvahs and Confirmation 
ceremonies in our local mega-tribes. 

The rebirthing of the second circuit is (relatively) complete 
when the Bottom Dog subject begins to seek, sincerely (not 
hypocritically) to win the approval of the Top Dogs. This, of 
course, only begins as play-acting; the skilled brainwasher 
knows that, and does not really object. With subtle reinforcement 
the play-acting becomes more and more genuine. Edmund Burke 
noted long ago, and every Method Actor knows, that you cannot 
make three dramatic gestures of rage in a political speech, with- 
out beginning to feel some real rage. You cannot make three 
gestures of submission without beginning to feel really submis- 
sive. (This is the psychology of the "company man," who truly 
identifies with his employer after years of obedience.) 

The draftee first tries to please the sergeant, to avoid further 
humiliation and punishment. Gradually, he genuinely wants to 
please the sergeant, i.e., to prove he is not all wrong and is "good 
enough" to be a soldier. Patty Hearst undoubtedly pretended to 
accept the SLA reality-tunnel at first, and gradually found the 
presence becoming more and more real. 

This process is accelerated by a system of occasional rewards, 
as the subject more and more often emits (as the Behaviorists 
would say) the desired behaviors. Since people are more compli- 
cated than Behaviorists know, it is necessary to vary this with 
occasional punishments for "insincerity," or "backsliding," so 
that the subject learns that after the initial stage, it is not enough 
to pretend to accept the new reality -tunnel; to escape further 
humiliation, ego-loss, terrorism and permanent Bottom Dog 
status, one must begin to accept it sincere/y. After the imprint of 
helplessness had been made, this conditioning and learning will 



Prometheus Rising 1 67 

proceed fairly smoothly, especially if the Chief Brainwasher's 
confederates reinforce it with encouragement, support, and 
general "reward" (for sincere submission) and contempt, disap- 
pointment and general rejection (for insincerity or backsliding.) 

Reimprinting the third semantic circuit can now follow easily. 
The human brain is capable of mastering any symbol-system if 
sufficiently motivated. Some people can even play Beethoven's 
late piano music, although to me this is as "miraculous" as any 
feat alleged by psychic researchers; people can learn French, 
Hindustani, differential calculus, Swahili, etc. ad. infinitum—//' 
motivated. When the first circuit security needs have been 
reimprinted and second-circuit ego-needs have been hooked to 
mastering a new semantic reality-tunnel, that tunnel will be 
imprinted. 

At this point a certain amount of arbitrary nonsense is of great 
value. That is, the new reality-tunnel or symbol-system (like the 
old one) should contain pitfalls (gross violations of previous real- 
ity tunnels and common sense) so that the subject can be accused 
of backsliding (being "all wrong," after all) and thereby incited 
to try harder to become part of the new reality-tunnel. 

Thus, Jehovah’s Witnesses may not accept blood transfusions, 
even if their life depends on it: harder still (since all mammals 
have an instinct to protect their young) they must reject blood 
transfusions for their children, even if the children die of this 
neglect. A Roman Catholic woman may not be divorced even if 
her husband comes home drunk every night, beats her up and 
gives her VD. In the U.S. Marines, a recruit who commits the 
hideous crime of calling a rifle a "gun" must walk around the 
base with his rifle in one hand and his penis in the other reciting 
to everybody he meets, "This is my rifle/This is my gun/This is 
for fighting/This is for fun." Theosophists were once required to 
believe that there is a hole at the North Pole going down to the 
center of the earth; Manson required his followers to believe the 
hole was in the Mojave Desert. Nazi Party members were asked 
to believe that the lion is an Aryan animal and the rabbit non- 
Aryan. Etc. 

The neurological and sociological function of such 
"nonsense" (which makes the Rationalist gasp in shock) is to 
sharply segregate those within the new reality-tunnel from those 



168 


Prometheus Rising 


outside. This makes for group solidarity, group-reinforcement, 
and a strong sense of alienation and discomfort when on rare 
occasions it is necessary to talk at all with those outside the 
brainwasher's semantic system. The group must ensure, of 
course, that this alienation is experienced as "superiority." Those 
who are outside the reality-tunnel must be perceived as "all 
wrong” — just as the subject was, before being brainwashed. 

Drugs can be, and have been, used to fine-tune these process- 
es, but the general neurological principles are powerful enough 
that it is quite likely that many famous cases of brainwashing 
were accomplished as above described, without any drugs at 
all — -e.g., the American soldiers who confessed to war crimes 
which they evidently had not committed, the loyal Communists 
who confessed to Trotskyite conspiracies which seemingly never 
existed, etc. It takes very few weeks for most armies, without 
drugs, to convert a civilian into a soldier, even though the two 
species are as different as Roman Catholics and Shintoists. 

In one of my Immortal Novels I describe a religious cult 
called Loonies, founded by one Neon Bal Loon, in which mem- 
bers pray in pig-Latin while standing on one leg like storks. This 
is considered satire, but any would-be messiah who understands 
the above principles could create such a cult easily; and the 
members would soon have a quite sincere sense of superiority to 
those outside that reality-tunnel. 

Cults and outlaw terrorists generally follow the above proce- 
dures by further rewiring of the fourth, socio-sexual circuit. 
(Governments usually leave that circuit alone, since government 
agents are largely puritanical-authoritarian and afraid to get 
involved at all with raw Eros.) It is no secret that the most 
powerful secret society of the middle ages, the Knights Templar, 
forced recruits to participate in both blasphemy and sodomy. Just 
as the deliberate nonsense of all cultish third-circuit semantics 
isolates the group from the rest of society, this initiation sepa- 
rated the Templars from the rest of Christendom; the alienation 
could easily be conditioned into a sense of superiority. The Mau- 
Maus in Kenya also insisted on one act of homosexuality to 
break the new member's previous conditioning toward hetero- 
sexuality and monogamy. Other cults, some quite well known, 



Prometheus Rising 


169 

attempt to repress sexuality entirely — another way of breaking 
the statistically normal imprinting of the fourth circuit. 

The Manson Family insisted on what might be called, oxymo- 
ronically, compulsory free love. The Army serves normal ama- 
tive bonds and casts the subject into a world where compulsory 
celibacy alternates with whore-house adventures and, quite often, 
the rape of enemy women, with homosexuality as an ever- 
present hidden option. A current American guru, Da Free John, 
imprints his subjects for lifelong monogamy, almost like the 
outside U.S. culture, but is indifferent as to whether these pair- 
ings are heterosexual or homosexual. Whatever variation the 
cult-leader may choose, what makes for successful "separate 
reality" is that it be in some respect outlandishly different from 
that of the major society. 

The easiest way to get brainwashed is to be born. All of the 
above principles then immediately go into action, a process 
which social psychologists euphemistically call socialization. 
The bio-survival circuit automatically hooks onto or bonds to the 
most appropriate mother or mothering object; the emotional- 
territorial circuit looks for a "role" or ego-identification in the 
family or tribe; the semantic circuit leams to imitate and then use 
the local reality-grids (symbol systems); the socio-sexual circuit 
is imprinted by whatever mating experiences are initially avail- 
able at puberty. 

The subjects may not come out of this process ready to 
murder women and children, like the graduate of boot camp, or 
even willing to believe that Charlie Manson was both Jesus and 
Satan simultaneously, or willing to spout New Left slogans while 
robbing banks. The subjects come out of normal "socialization" 
depending on where and when they were born as Eskimo 
totemists, Moslem fundamentalists, Roman Catholics, Marxist 
Leninists, Nazis, Methodist Republicans, Oxford-educated- 
agnostics, snake worshippers, Ku Kluxers, Mafiosos, Unitarians, 
IRA-ists, PLO-ists, orthodox Jews, hardshell Baptists, etc. etc. 

The universe or existence, is obviously large enough and 
complex enough and the ego self-centered enough, that all of 
these reality-tunnels are capable of "making sense," to some 
degree, to those imprinted/conditioned to accept them. It is also 
obvious that most of these reality-tunnels contain elements so 



I JO 


Prometheus Rising 


absurd that everybody not imprinted/conditioned by them looks 
at them with astonishment and dismay, wondering "How can a 
rational person (or peoples) believe such rubbish?" 



What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves... whether you are 
living in a Christian reality-tunnel, a Mansonoid reality-tunnel, 
an Immortalist reality-tunnel, a vegetarian reality-tunnel, a 
Rationalist reality-tunnel. . . 

Everybody has the only true true religion. 

Earlier, we quoted some words from Persinger and Lafreniere: 

We, as a species, exist in a world in which exist a myriad of 
data points. Upon these matrices of points we superimpose a 
structure and the world makes sense to us. The pattern of the 
structure originates within our biological and sociological 
properties. 



Prometheus Rising r/1 

It is to be hoped that this makes more sense to the reader now 
than it did at the beginning of our enquiry. 

The function of the domesticated primate brain, insofar as we 
have described it up to this point and leaving out the higher, 
newer circuits, is to serve as an "organ of adaptation" in Freud's 
phrase. Specifically, the oldest, most primitive, most mechanical 
centers serve simple bio-survival. The more recent (500,000,000 
year-old, roughly) emotional territorial centers serve to maintain 
pack identity, habitat-space and hierarchy. The distinctly homi- 
nid semantic circuit (100,000-year-old?) makes maps and 
models — reality-tunnels— which we tend to confuse with reality 
itself, and, worse yet, with "all" of reality. The (30,000? year 
old) moral-social circuit creates the domesticated adult personal- 
ity, or parent-role, or super-ego. 

Now, obviously the third, semantic circuit works with and for 
these other antique circuits. The maps and models it makes are 
tools of adaptation, and what they adapt us to is social roles in 
domesticated primate society. Thus, a Midwestern Methodist is 
not "misusing his brain" as Arthur Koestler thinks in construct- 
ing a Midwestern Methodist tunnel-reality; that is precisely what 
his brain is for, to adapt him to the Midwestern Methodist tribal 
system — to impose the structure of Midwestern Methodist ideol- 
ogy upon the myriad of data-points he encounters in his life- 
time. The Chinese Maoist, the Iranian Moslem, the New York 
Feminist, the Marin County Hedonist, etc. each has a similar, 
equally arbitrary, equally complex reality-tunnel. Each tunnel is 
also equally absurd when seen from outside. 

The problems of the modern world arise from the fact that 
these reality-tunnels are no longer isolated from each other. 
Throughout most of human history and up to 100 years ago — up 
to 20 years ago, in some parts of the world — a man or woman 
could lead their entire life snugly within the cocoon of the local 
tunnel-reality. Today, we all constantly collide with persons 
living in wildly different tunnel-realities. This creates a great 
deal of hostility in the more ignorant, vast amounts of metaphys- 
ical and ethical confusion in the more sophisticated, and growing 
disorientation for all — a situation known as our "crisis of 
values." 



Prometheus Rising 


172 

The average person has a deluge of contradictory and conflict- 
ing reality-tunnels impinging on him or her, with little training in 
either cultural or neurological relativism. Speed of travel has 
increased by a factor of 1000 since 1900, and speed of commu- 
nication by a factor of 10,000,000, according to J.R. Platt. The 
deluge is accelerating and intensifying. One symptom is the fact 
that TV Guide has been taken over by a band of terrified conser- 
vatives, who cannot understand and can only dread this down- 
pour of "alien" signals; instead of being merely a guide to what 
is on the tube, TV Guide has become a continuous wail that the 
tube’s tunnel-reality is wider, stranger and more varied than the 
narrow tunnel-vision of the small-town WASP. 



There has also arisen a profession of “deprogrammers,” so- 
called. These are neuro-technicians who will, for a fee, kidnap a 
child (even a "child" over 21) who has wandered off, departed 
the parental reality-tunnel and been brainwashed into the com- 
peting reality-tunnel of some new (i.e., not established — not 
acceptable yet) "cult." This is known as restoring the victim to 
normalcy. 



Prometheus Rising 


>73 

It is all hypocrisy and neurological ignorance, of course. The 
"de-programmers" are actually re-programmers. The parental 
tunnel-reality is as arbitrary (and, to an outsider, as bizarre) as 
that of any "cult." A special system of tricky semantics allows 
most people and some courts to ignore these facts. Just imagine 
what would happen if a wayward child of Methodist parents had 
wandered into the Roman Catholic Church, say, and the parents 
attempted to have that child coercively "de-programmed" (repro- 
grammed) into Methodism; or if the child had joined the U.S. 
Army, like Calley, and the parents kidnapped him and tried to re- 
program him into civilian reality-tunnels. 

These problems will not go away; and the abrasions they 
cause, as various brainwashed robots continue to collide with 
each other, will accelerate. Speed of travel and of communica- 
tion are still continuing to accelerate. 

Fortunately, higher circuits are forming in the human brain 
and offer broader vistas than the narrow tunnel-visions of the 
antique circuits. That is the topic of our concluding chapters. 

Since everybody "prefers" one circuit over the others, there 
are people in each society who are easily recognizable as Narcis- 
sists (first-circuit robots), Emotionalists (second-circuit robots), 
Rationalists (third-circuit robots) and Moralists (fourth-circuit 
robots). 

Rationalist robots, like the other robots, may be totally mech- 
anized or may have some slight flexibility, or "freedom" built 
into their circuitry. The totally robotized make up the vast horde 
of the Fundamentalist wing of the Materialist church and the 
other True Believers in the scientific paradigms of 1968, 1958, 
1948 or whenever their nervous systems stopped taking new 
imprints. 

These are the people who are perpetually frightened and dis- 
mayed by the large portion of human behavior mediated through 
Circuit II mammalian politics. They think that because this terri- 
torial-emotional ("patriotic") behavior is not Rational, it should 
not exist. They accept Darwin as dogma, but are nervous about 
"Darwinism" (because it accepts mammalian politics as an 
Evolutionary Strategy that has worked thus far) and are repulsed 
by the data of ethology, genetics and sociobiology. They don't 
like the rest of the human race much, because it is not guided by 



174 


Prometheus Rising 


their favorite circuit, and they are uneasily aware that the rest of 
the human race does not like them much. 

These Rationalist robots are also very uncomfortable with the 
newer circuits — and some of them spend most of their lives 
writing articles and books devoted to "proving" that the newer 
circuits do not exist and that all scientists who have recorded the 
behavior of these newer circuits are liars, fools, bunglers, charla- 
tans or some manner of Damned Heretics. 

Like the Emotional robot, the Moralistic robot, the Narcissist 
robot etc., the Rationalist robot cannot be "argued" out of his 
narrow reality tunnel. We can only emphasize, one more time, 
that each and every reality-tunnel created by a domesticated 
primate brain is a finite cross-section of that brain's personal 
history; and each such finite reality-tunnel is as "personalized" as 
the music of Bach or Beethoven, the paintings of Rembrandt or 
Picasso, the novels of Joyce or Raymond Chandler, the comedy 
of the Three Stooges or Monty Python, the religions of Roman 
Catholicism or Zen Buddhism, the politics of Libertarianism or 
the IRA, the architecture of St. Peter's or Disneyland... 

And each of these art- works seems like "reality" to the people 
who have created them and live in them. Rationalism is just 
another such group art-work, a little less tolerant than most, a 
little more useful to technologists than any other, a little stupid 
when it can no longer transcend the last paradigm it has created. 

The totally robotized Rationalist, the one whose nervous 
system has stopped growing entirely, can be recognized by two 
signs: 

He or she is constantly trying to prove that much of the daily 
experience of the rest of humanity is "delusion," "hallucination," 
"group hallucination," "mass hallucination," "mere coincidence," 
"sheer coincidence," or "sloppy research." 

And he or she never thinks that any of his or her own experi- 
ence would fit into any of those categories. 

EXERCIZES 

1. Become a pious Roman Catholic. Explain in three pages 
why the Church is still infallible and holy despite Popes like 
Alexander VI (the Borgia Pope), Pious XII (ally of Hitler), etc. 



Prometheus Rising / 75 

2. For those of you who remember Mai Lai, become Lt. 
Calley. Say aloud, and really feel and believe, "The Army comes 
first. I'm for the Army all the way." If you don't remember try 
Jerry Falwell. Say aloud, and really feel and believe, "Help us 
fight moral decay, send your checks in today." 

3. Refute this whole book. Demonstrate that everybody else 
has been brainwashed but you and your mother (father) has the 
one, real, objective v iew of the universe. 

4. Accept this book, if not in whole at least in general out- 
lines. Assume you have been brainwashed. Try to learn as much 
from every human you meet about their separate reality-tunnel 
and see how much of it you can use to make your reality-tunnel 
bigger and more inclusive. In other words, learn to listen. 

5. James Joyce said he never met a boring human being. Try 
to explain this. Try to get into the Joycean head space, where 
everybody is a separate reality-island full of mystery and sur- 
prise. In other words, learn to observe. 

6. Read Aldous Huxley's The Genius and the Goddess. Note 
how the Circuit III scientific Genius reverts to Circuit I helpless 
infant when his wife leaves him. 

7. After experimenting with the Nazi reality-tunnel, the 
Catholic reality-tunnel etc., re-enter your "normal" reality tunnel. 
Does it still seem totally objective, or do you begin to recognize 
how much of it is your own software and hardware running 
programs? 

8 . Finally, explore the tunnel-busting reality of Christopher S. 
Hyatt's book titled Undoing Yourself With Energized Meditation 
and Other Devices. What tunnel-reality is he selling and how 
sincere is he about his writing? Also, do you think he has read 
my work and I his, or is this last statement a gimmick of the pub- 
lishers played on two innocent authors and the trusting public or 
even worse did I write his book, or could it be, that we are one 
and the same? 




CHAPTER ELEVEN 


THE HOLISTIC 
NEUROSOMATIC CIRCUIT 


But there is also in us an aspiration for the mastery of Nature... 
Health, strength, duration, happiness and ease, liberation from 
suffering, are part of the physical transformation which., .evolution 
is called upon to realize. 

— Sri Aurobindo, The Future Evolution of Man 



THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY NEED NOT BE 
POSTPONED UNTIL AFTER DEATH. IT CAN HAPPEN 
A TAN Y MOMENT . 



This is a copy of Crowley’s inspired drawing. For his original 
see The Book ofThoth or study his Tarot deck. 

The beast with four heads represents the antique circuits; the 
hedonic "laid-back" nude is neurosomatic rapture. The serpent is 
"the rising of the kundalini serpent," a Hindu metaphor for 
imprinting this Circuit V neurosomatic bliss-control. 

Calling all downs. Calling all downs to dayne. Array! 
Surrection! ... It is just, it is just about to, it is just about to 
rolywholyover. 

— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake 


I 7 8 



The word "psychosomatic" has been around long enough to be 
generally understood; unfortunately, it is another semantic 
spook. The concept of "psyche" or "soul" was borrowed from 
the theologians, who, being bankrupt, are in no position to lend 
anything. 

What we know and experience — our tunnel-reality — is what 
registers on the brain and nervous system. 

The phenomena of "faith healing," "regeneration," "rejuvena- 
tion," bliss, ecstasy, rapture, etc. have been occurring for many 
thousands of years, in all known cultures. In the pre-scientific 
language of yesterday's psychology we would refer to such 
events as "psychosomatic." In our deliberately modernistic and 
almost sci-fi jargon, we prefer to call them neurosomatic. 

The neurosomatic circuit of the brain is much more recent 
than the antique circuits previously discussed. It does not mani- 
fest in all human beings, and appears late in life, usually, to those 
who do activate and imprint it. 

r^mporaryneurosomatic consciousness can be acquired by 
(a) the yoga practice of pranayama breathing and (b) for those 
who can handle it, by ingestion of Cannabis drugs, such as 
hashish and marijuana, which trigger neurotransmitters that acti- 
vate this circuit. 

Of the former device, pranayama , Aleister Crowley — certain- 
ly the most skeptical of all mystics — writes forcefully: 

For mind and body alike there is no purgative like pranayama, 
no purgative like pranayama. 

For mind and body alike, for mind and body alike — 
alike! — there is, there is, there is no purgative like prana- 
yama — pranayama! — pranayama! yea, for mind and body 
alike there is no purgative, no purgative, no purgative (for 
mind and body alike) no purgative like pranayama! 

If this is not emphatic enough, Crowley adds elsewhere: 

Pranayama is notably useful in quieting the emotions and 
appetites... Digestive troubles in particular are very easy to 
remove in this way. It purifies both the body and the mind and 
should be practiced certainly never less than one hour daily by 
the serious student. 

To which he adds a footnote: 

Emphatically. Emphatically. Emphatically. It is impossible to 
combine pranayama properly performed with emotional 


179 



i8o 


Prometheus Rising 


thought [second-circuit reflexes — R.A.W.j. It should be 
resorted to immediately, at all times during life, when calm is 
threatened. 

This is very strong stuff from the mystic who filled his books 
with jokes and jeers, and who always told his students, not 
"Believe me," but "Don't believe me." About pranayama, for 
once in his life, Crowley was serious. 

In the experience of this author, pranayama will remove all 
forms of depression, including profound grief and bereavement; 
it will soothe anger and remove resentments; it seems beneficial 
to all minor health problems and-— occasionally — major health 
problems. Hindus, who are professionals at pranayama, claim a 
great deal more, such as: immunity to pain of all sorts, Samadhi 
("union with God"), levitation, etc. 

Most notably, pranayama creates neurosomatic Turn On: 
sensory enrichment, sensual bliss, perceptual delight, and a 
general laid-back Hedonic "high." Similar effects are produced 
by voluntary isolation in a Lilly tank, by zero-gravity (the 
astronaut's "mystical" experiences are all of this neurosomatic 
variety) and, for the judicious or lucky, Cannabis drugs, as said 
above. ; ' 

Negative neurosomatic circuit effects are experienced by 
amateur yogis, by many pot-heads, and by a large number of 
schizophrenics. The neurosomatic feedback loop, in these unfor- 
tunate cases, reverses the above description. Sensory experience 
becomes unpleasant (any sound or touch is painful), sensuality 
turns into acute discomfort with the entire body, perceptions 
warp into nightmare, and general anxiety is imprinted. Light is 
particularly terrifying and painful, often associated with Hell or 
with "mind-control" manipulated by unscrupulous enemies. 

Gopi Krishna, a Hindu bureaucrat who took up yoga origi- 
nally only for health reasons, was abruptly catapulted into a 
negative neurosomatic state for several years. All sensations were 
so painful that he many times thought he would die. The details, 
in his autobiography, Kundalini, are pathetic, and sound much 
like schizophrenia. He came out of this finally, entered a positive 
neurosomatic state, and has been writing blissful books about the 
Perfection of the All, typical of this circuit, ever since. 



Prometheus Rising l8l 

Nikola Tesla, the Yugoslav genius, went through the same 
"Hell" or schizoid state, without yoga, in his teens. He came out 
of the horrors with the scientific theory of alternating currents 
worked out, a belief in extra-sensory perception, a superhuman 
memory, and a streak of visionary humanitarianism that led him 
into continuous conflicts with the corporations that financed his 
more-than-100 major electrical inventions. (He earned over 
$1,000,000 before the age of 30, at a time when $1,000,000 was 
a lot of money, and he died broke, trying to sell an invention he 
said would abolish poverty.) 

Most shamans, and many mystics, have been through similar 
negative-to-positive neurosomatic sensitization. Christian Scien- 
tists call it “ chemicalization . ” St. John of the Cross called it, 
poetically, the Dark Night of the Soul. Cabalists call it "crossing 
the Abyss." 

In Kazanzakis' The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel, Odysseus 
sees a statue which seems to him urgently meaningful. The statue 
was Kazanzakis’ symbol for the evolution of these circuits, 
which have been known (more or less) in various symbolisms for 
a few thousand years. E.g., the "seven souls" of the Egyptians, 
the ten "lights" of the Cabalists, etc. 

The Kazanzakis statue shows an animal (Circuit I), a warrior 
above the animal (Circuit II), a scholar above the warrior (Circuit 
III), a lover (Circuit IV), a face in agony ("chemicalization" the 
"Dark Night of the Soul", the "crossing of the Abyss" which 
equals the entry to Circuit V the hard way), a face in bliss 
(successful Circuit V reimprinting) and a man turning into pure 
spirit (Circuit VII). Circuit VI is missing in the schemata, as 
Circuit IV is missing in Jung, and everything above Circuit III is 
missing in Carl Sagan. 

Some lucky souls jump to Circuit V bliss without passing 
through the horrors of "chemicalization" and the "Dark Night of 
the Soul." 

The neurosomatic circuit is "polymorphous perverse," in 
Freud's unappetizing terminology. This merely means that the 
nervous system itself, taking over as driver, is now directing the 
rest of the body. "Every act (becomes) an orgasm," said Aleister 
Crowley, giving his own Tantric emphasis to the polymorphous 
nature of this circuit. 



182 


Prometheus Rising 


The lives of the saints are full of stories which seem 
"miracles" to the four-circuited majority, or are rejected as "lies, 
hoaxes, yams" by the three-circuited dogmatic Rationalist, but 
which seem perfectly normal from the viewpoint of five-circuited 
polymorphous consciousness. The saint says he is in rapture, and 
full of gratitude to God, for giving him such a feast for dinner 
as— plain bread and water. (Of course, many a pot-head will 
understand that degree of neurosomatic rapture...) The guru 
comes into the room and his bio-energy 1 has such a charge that a 
cripple jumps up and is "healed"; the cripple merely acquired 
neurosomatic turn-on by contact, as some people get "contact 
high" when others are on drugs. The fire-walkers in many 
shamanic traditions walk on the fire, as they tell enquiring 
anthropologists, to prove their control over "the spirit” — i.e., to 
demonstrate to themselves and others that they have achieved 
high-quality neurosomatic tuning. 

One faith-healer told the present author, "Most people die of 
adrenaline poisoning." In our terminology, most people have too 
much first-circuit anxiety and second-circuit territorial pugnacity 
for their own good. They are literally struggling for survival, as 
no other animals do, despite Darwin. Most animals simply play 
most of the time, solve problems of survival when they have to, 
or die of not solving the problems; only humans are conscious of 
struggling, and hence worried and depressed about the Game of 
Life. 

The faith-healer went on, "What cures them is realizing that 
I'm not afraid." That is, contact with a fifth-circuit personality, a 
person who controls his or her own Circuit II adrenaline-trips, 
can be a catalyst, throwing the sufferer upward into a personal 
fifth-circuit experience. 

The avant-garde 20% of the population, due to the 
Consciousness Movement (a secularization of much ancient 
shamanic wisdom), already understands every "wild" idea in the 
last few pages. They have had enough neurosomatic experience 

By which we mean nothing "mystical." It is now known that many 
physical energies radiate from the body, and that even chemical 
effects can be transmitted (experienced as emotional "vibes") from 
one person to another, the chemicals acting as stimuli to trigger 
neurotransmitter actions in the second person. 



Prometheus Rising 


183 


to know that they were once totally robotized (as most people 
still are) and are knowingly engaged in acquiring more neuroso- 
matic know-how. When this reaches 51% of the population, a 
major historic al revolution will have occurred, as profound as 
the Life Extension Revolution . 1 

In McLuhan's terms, the fifth circuit is "non-linear" and 
"global." That is, it is not limited by the one-thing-at-a-time 
sequences of the semantic circuit; it thinks in Gestalts. This is 
why it is so often connected with "intuition," which is a way of 
thinking between and around data-points on the perceptual 
screen — sensing what total field the points must be part of. 

The great musician has developed a remarkable feedback 
between fifth-circuit Gestalt- ing and the third-circuit function of 
coding such "coherent structures" into the inspired symbolism of 
music. Music always leads to some right-brain activity in listen- 
ers, and the fifth circuit is almost certainly located in the right 
brain hemisphere. 

Beethoven, we remember, was left-handed. Since the left 
hand is neurologically linked to the polymorphous right brain, 
one might say he was genetically inclined to right brain activi- 
ties, that is, to sensing coherent wholes, to plunging into neuro- 
somatic bliss almost "at will," and to sensory-sensual raptness 
and rapture. Everybody "knows" that the Sixth Symphony is 
"pantheistic," but whether Beethoven was an ideological panthe- 
ist or not, that way of responding to nature is normal and natural 
right-brain Circuit V functioning. That is, anybody on the Fifth 
Circuit will "talk like a pantheist" whether or not he has devel- 
oped a "philosophy" about pantheism. The miracle of Beethoven 
is not that he felt the universe that way — a few thousand fifth- 
circuit types throughout history have also felt and sensed nature 
that way — but that he mastered the third-circuit art of music with 
such skill that he could communicate such experiences, which is 
precisely what the ordinary "mystic" cannot do. 

The neurosomatic circuit probably began to appear around 
30,000 years ago. (That is the conclusion of Barbara Honnegger, 
who has made a profound study of European cave paintings, 
coming to the conclusion that many of them show exercizes to 


Please re-read this sentence, and think about it. 



184 


Prometheus Rising 


increase right-brain activity similar to those still used in surviv- 
ing shamanic and yogic traditions.) 

This fifth circuit is bonded into the right cortex and neurolog- 
ically linked to the limbic (first circuit) system and the genitalia. 
These neural links explain the sexual metaphor of “kundalini” or 
"serpent" energy used to describe this circuit in systems as 
varied as Indian Tantra, Gnosticism and Voodoo, and the 
Chinese yin yang (male-female) energies associated with it. 

Prolonged sexual play without orgasm always triggers some 
Circuit V consciousness. 

It is quite easy to determine if the Fifth Circuit has been acti- 
vated successfully or not. How often does a person go to a 
doctor? If a mind researcher is "glowing" rather than greyish, 
"bouncy" rather than craggy, if he or she has a “sparkle” — and if 
he or she virtually never goes to a doctor — the neurosomatic 
circuit has been mastered. As Mary Baker Eddy once wrote 
(thereby making herself hugely unpopular with those who love to 
talk of matters mystical but have no empirical knowledge): 

"The Word was made flesh.” Divine Truth must be known by 
its effects on the body as well as on the mind. 

There is no tribe known to anthropology which doesn't have 
at least one neurosomatic technician (shaman). Large-scale out- 
bursts of neurosomatic consciousness have occurred frequently 
in all the major historical periods, usually being stamped out 
quickly by the local branch of the Inquisition or the A.M.A.; 
other outbursts have been co-opted and diluted. 

As we read in the New Testament: 

And when he had called into him his twelve disciples, he gave 
them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to 
heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease... 

And as ye go, preach, saying, the kingdom of heaven is at 
hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out 
devils: freely ye have received, freely give. 

— Matt 10: 1-8 

It may or may not have happened exactly like that; as Mark 
Twain would say, there might be a few stretchers in there. But 
something like this, however much the evangelist may exagger- 
ate it, must have happened to account for Christianity's rapid tri- 
umph over other, but probably less effective, systems of opening 



Prometheus Rising 


185 

the fifth circuit. Mithraism, the Eleusinian cult at Athens, the 
Dionysian cults, etc. all had age-old shamanic techniques for 
inducing neurosomatic rapture; Christianity (atfirst) seems to 
have been superior in creating neurosomatic control. In St. 
Paul's metaphor, the "Old Adam" (Circuits I-IV) got bleached 
out, and the "New Adam" (Circuit V) took over as the center of 
consciousness and self-government. In another metaphor, the 
body became the flexible clay and the awakened (illuminated) 
brain became the sculptor. 

In general, fourth-circuit problems take the form of guilt; "I 
cannot do what I am supposed to do." Third-circuit problems 
take the form of perplexity; "I cannot understand how I got into 
this mess, or how to get out of it, or what is expected of me," etc. 
Second-circuit problems take the form of bullying or cowardice: 
"I will force them, or I will surrender and let them force me." 
First-circuit problems take the form of body symptoms: "I feel 
rotten all over" gradually centering in, under enough stress, on 
one acute disabling symptom . 1 

Fifth-Circuit neurosomatic consciousness bleaches out all 
these problems at once. The disappearance of first-circuit 
"physical" illnesses only seems more "miraculous" than the tran- 
scendence of second-circuit emotionalism, third-circuit perplex- 
ity and fourth-circuit guilt. It is the Cartesian mind/body dualism 
that makes us think of such first-circuit "physical" cures as 
somehow stranger or more spooky than any rapid improvement 
on the other circuits. 

One of the intents of our terminology is precisely to transcend 
that Cartesian dualism, making all the circuits equally compre- 
hensible within one context. 

The robotized Rationalist fears and resents Circuit V rapture 
and its holistic intuitive faculties (just as the robotized Emotion- 
alist fears and resents Circuit III reason). Thus, when the neuro- 
somatic circuit feedback begins to function, and the mutated Cir- 
cuit V person tries to describe his or her rapture and at-oneness, 
the Rationalist hastily mutters that this is "merely subjective." 


This last is Eric Berne's "Wooden Leg" game, which asks to be 
relieved of social participation or interaction on the grounds of being 
physically hors de combat. 



i86 


Prometheus Rising 


Misery is "merely subjective," too, but that doesn't keep it 
from hurting. The neurosomatic skill of transmuting all experi- 
ence, so that one is high and happy in a situation where the four- 
circuited majority would be miserable, is worth learning for the 
very simple, egotistic reason that it's more fun to be happy than 
to be in agony. It is also socially beneficial, because, as Tim 
Leary often said, "You can't do good until you feel good." Just 
as misery loves company, the high and happy want everybody 
else to be high and happy. (This first lesson the fifth-circuit adept 
has to learn is to control this upsurge of altruism and not make a 
nuisance of oneself by trying to force everybody to be happy...) 

The Rationalist is even more alarmed by the results of pro- 
longed fifth-circuit bliss, which includes the ability to heal a 
wide variety of diseases both in oneself and in others. Even the 
well documented current research on endorphins — which gives 
us the beginning of a neuro-chemical explanation of how such 
healings operate — is regarded with discomfort or hostility by the 
more robotized Rationalists. It all sounds "metaphysical" and 
therefore it cannot exist. 1 

There is nothing supernatural about the fifth circuit. It merely 
appears "supernatural" by comparison to the earlier circuits; but 
the third circuit, of which the Rationalist is so proud, undoubt- 
edly appeared "supernatural" when it first appeared. (The 
Egyptians attributed speech and writing, third-circuit functions, 
to divine intervention by the god Thoth.) The fifth circuit, like 
the earlier circuits, is just another evolutionary mutation, neces- 
sary to us as we move toward a more complex neuro-social level. 

"It's just like ordinary life, except that you're always a foot 
above the ground," says an old Zen proverb. 

This "floating" aspect of the fifth circuit is preparing us for 
extraterrestrial migration. 

One of the most interesting neurosomatic adepts in all history, 
from the viewpoint of the present theory, was Mary Baker Eddy. 
Precisely because Mrs. Eddy was fundamentally naive and 

1 Endorphins are neurotransmitters that trigger Circuit V. They can be 
activated by cannabis drugs, psychedelics, meditation, pranayama, or 
visualization of white light. The last is the most common system used 
by "faith-healers" and was known to the medieval Rosicrucians. 



Prometheus Rising 


unaware of most of philosophy, she never realized that you 
cannot speak or write about the Ineffable. She therefore wrote 
about it at length. If her writings are hard to decipher, if they 
often sound like "the ravings of a disordered mind" (Aleister 
Crowley's description of mystic writings, including his own), 
they also have moments of astonishing lucidity. For instance, she 
knew and wrote with total clarity that illness is fear and love is 
its cure. Most psychologists are just beginning to comprehend 
that today, over 100 years later. 

"Perfect love casteth out fear" and that is how neurosomatic 
awakening cures disease. 

As Mrs. Eddy told one enquirer, "Love, love, love! That's all 
you have to know to be a healer." Sixty years later, unheeded by 
most of his profession, a Scottish psychiatrist, Ian Suttie, wrote 
that "The physician's love heals the patient." 

Another quote from Mrs. Eddy is appropriate at this point: 

When understanding changes we shall gain the reality of life, 
the control of soul over sense... This must be the climax, 
before harmonious and immortal man is obtained and his 
capabilities revealed. 

To the ordinary scientifically-educated reader, this is meta- 
physical gibberish. Let us try to re-translate it into our own 
neurological metaphors: 

When the brain develops its full potentials we shall gain a new 
view of life and the control of neurosomatic bliss over lower- 
circuit guilts, perplexities, emotions and ‘body symptoms'... 

This is evolutionarily scheduled to occur before sixth-circuit 
evolutionary awareness and physical immortality are achieved. 

We suggest that Mrs. Eddy, having activated a large part of 
the right brain hemisphere, was able to think in Gestalts as well 
as serving as transmitter of neurosomatic "healing" to others. 
She was looking down the DNA highway to the scientific break- 
throughs of the decade in which we now live. 

Many have turned on the neurosomatic circuit due to pro- 
longed illness, especially if they grow impatient with doctors and 
resort to self medication and/or faith-healing. The bathroom of 
Nietzsche, according to Stefan Zweig, looked "like a pharmacy 
shop," due to the large number of drugs and medicines with 



1 88 


Prometheus Rising 


which the philosopher treated his chronic migraines. Gurdjieff 
employed cocaine, hashish and yoga techniques (probably 
including pranayama) to treat the incessant and increasing pains 
resultant from his war wounds and two car accidents. The 
"harshness" of these two philosophers, their contempt for ordi- 
nary human suffering, their visions of the superhuman state 
beyond emotion and pain, all probably derived from neuroso- 
matic Turn Ons alternating with acute pain. That is, they experi- 
enced the whole of evolution from the lower circuits to the full 
development of neurosomatic bliss, and were expressing chiefly 
contempt for their own relapses into less-than-blissful conscious- 
ness. 

In the East, the control of the neurosomatic circuit is known 
as dhyana, cha 'anor Zen\ the state is sometimes called "Buddha- 
mind" or "Buddha-body." To the ancient Greeks, where rituals to 
achieve it with psychedelic drugs were performed yearly at 
Eleusis, those who accomplished the ritual successfully were 
called digenes, "twice-born." The metaphor lingers in the "born 
again" terminology of charismatic Christianity, and is symbol- 
ized by the myth of the Resurrection of the Body. 

Freud recognized this state, vaguely, as the "oceanic experi- 
ence." Gurdjieff calls this circuit the Magnetic Center. 

Faith-healers and adepts of a few yogic schools seem to live 
in neurosomatic consciousness permanently; most who have 
achieved it at all tend to have it only in flashes, as noted by Ezra 
Pound: 

Le Paradis n'est pas artificial 
but is jagged 

For a flash, 
for an hour. 

Then agony, 

then an hour. 

This “Paradis, " this condition of neurosomatic ("mind- 
body") peace, should be considered a new brain circuit toward 
which all humanity is evolving, slowly and painfully, out of 
mammalian antique circuits. This progression, from primate 
emotion to post-hominid tranquility, from "man" to "super man." 
is the Next Step that mystics forever talk of; you can hear it in 
most of Beethoven's later, major compositions. 



Prometheus Rising 189 

As mentioned before, governmental brainwashers are gener- 
ally too puritanical to handle, or manhandle, the socio-sexual 
circuit and content themselves with mind-washing and brain- 
programming on the bio-survival, emotional and semantic cir- 
cuits, while outlaw bands like the SLA or Mansonoids go further 
and reimprint the socio-sexual circuit also. 

It is necessary to note that some cults presently active on this 
backward planet go even further than that and engage in neuro- 
somatic brainwashing. 

A permanent neurosomatic circuit can only be imprinted by 
prolonged practice of one of the yogic, Tantric or related 
sciences, and perhaps good genes, good environments and good 
luck generally. 

Neurosomatic brainwashing — the most powerful form of 
robotization — consists in temporary activation of the neuroso- 
matic circuit by the brainwasher, together with assurances that 
only the brainwasher (or the "god" who "acts through him") can 
turn on this circuit. 

For full effect, this is, of course, proceeded by normal brain- 
washing, The victim is first isolated from his or her previous 
environment and trained to hook the bio-survival circuit onto the 
"guru" and/or the Ashram or commune. The emotional circuit is 
bent and broken by continuous attacks upon status (ego), until 
the only emotional security left is found in Total Submission to 
the group reality-island. The re-infantilized victim is then ready 
to imprint any semantic circuitry desired, from EST to Krishna to 
People's Temple, etc. The socio-sexual circuit can then easily be 
programmed for celibacy, for free love, or for whatever sexual 
game the guru has selected. Then, and only then, the neuroso- 
matic buttons are pushed and ecstasy is “given" to the subject 
"by" the guru. 

Marjoe Gortner, a long-time practitioner of this science, 
commented ironically in a film made after abandoning it for a 
different career, "The marks never realized they could do it" 
(push the neurosomatic buttons) "for themselves. They all think 
they need me jacking them off!" Gortner is, nowadays, unusually 
honest. The average charismatic insists that the victims can never 
learn to do it for themselves. 



Prometheus Rising 


One of the greatest historical practitioners of this neuroscience 
was Hassan i Sabbah, who used relatively simple techniques, 
including, evidently, a time-release capsule invented by the Sufi 
College of Wisdom in Cairo. 

As I describe Hassan's technique — based on historical 
records — in my novel, The Trick Top Hat: Two young candi- 
dates dine with Hassan; the food is laced with a time-release 
capsule. When asleep the candidates are taken to Hassan's 
famous "Garden of Delights." The capsule had released a heavy 
does of opium and they were quite thoroughly unconscious and 
unaware of their surroundings. 

The garden — of officially known as the "the Garden of 
Delights” — covered several acres. Here candidates were prepared 
for admission to the Order of the Assassins: they were to become 
the most feared and legendary professional killers in history. But 
here also, in this same garden, were prepared candidates for 
admission to the Brotherhood of Light, the Illuminati. The candi- 
dates, in fact, were prepared the same way. They themselves 
selected, unknown to themselves, which order they would 
enter— the political Assassins or the mystic Illuminati. 

Both young men were conveyed into the Garden of Delights 
and placed several acres apart from each other. In a short time, 
the second stage of the time-release capsule began to work; 
cocaine was released into their bloodstreams, thereby over- 
whelming the traces of the soporific opium and causing them to 
awaken full of energy and zest. At the same time, as they woke, 
hashish also began to be released, so they saw everything with 
exceptional clarity and all colors were jewel-like, brilliant, 
divinely beautiful. 

A group of extremely comely and busty young ladies- 
imported from the most expensive brothel in Cairo — sat in a 
circle around each of the young candidates, playing flutes and 
other delicately sweet musical instruments. "Welcome to 
heaven," they sang as the awakening men gazed about them in 
wonder. "By the magic of the holy Lord Hassan, you have 
entered Paradise while still alive." And they fed them "paradise 
apples" (oranges), far sweeter and stranger than the earth-apples 
they had known before, and they showed them the animals of 
paradise (imported from as far away as Japan, in some cases), 



Prometheus Rising IQI 

creatures far more remarkable than those ordinarily seen in 
Afghanistan. 

"This is heaven!" the first young man exclaimed, in ecstasy. 
"Great is Allah, and great is the wise Lord Hassan Sabbah!” 

But, twenty acres away, surrounded by similar lovely ladies 
and other wonders, the second young man merely gazed about 
him, smiled in contentment, and said nothing. 

And then, in both cases, the houris of Paradise, as promised in 
the Koran, began to dance, and as they danced, they discarded 
one by one each of their seven veils. As the veils were thrown 
off, more and more hashish was released from the capsules and 
the young men saw with greater clarity, felt with deeper inten- 
sity, experienced beauty and sexual joy in a way completely 
unknown in their previous earth lives. 

Then, as each young man sat entranced by the beauty and 
wonder of Heaven, the houris finished the dance, and nude and 
splendid as they were, rushed forward in a bunch, like flowers 
cast before the wind. And some fell at the candidate's feet and 
kissed his ankles; some kissed knees or thighs, one sucked raptly 
at his penis, others kissed the chest and arms and belly, a few 
kissed eyes and mouth and ears. And as he was smothered in this 
hashish-intensified avalanche of love, the lady working on his 
penis sucked and sucked and he climaxed in her mouth as softly 
and slowly and blissfully as a single snowflake falling. 

In a little while, there was no more hashish being released and 
more opium began to flow into the bloodstream, the young 
candidates slept again; and in their torpor, they were removed 
from the Garden of Delights and returned to the banquet hall of 
the Lord Hassan. 

There they awoke. 

"Truly," the first exclaimed, "1 have seen the glories of 
Heaven, as foretold in Al Koran. I have no more doubts. I will 
trust Hassan i Sabbah and love him and serve him." 

"You are accepted for the Order of Assassin," said Hassan 
solemnly. "Go at once to the Green Room to meet your superior 
in the order." 

When this candidate had left, Hassan turned to the second, 
asking, "And you?" 



Prometheus Rising 


ig 2 


"I have discovered the First Matter, the Medicine of Metals, 
the Elixir of Life, the Stone of the Philosophers, True Wisdom 
and Perfect Happiness," said he, quoting the alchemical formula. 
"And it is inside my own head!" 

Hassan i Sabbah grinned broadly. "Welcome to the Order of 
the Illuminati!” he said, laughing. 

Hassan i Sabbah was not the first or last student of the ways 
in which sexuality can be transmuted into fifth-circuit rapture. 
Further to the East, there were Tantric schools within Hinduism, 
Buddhism and Taoism, which taught techniques by which 
prolongation of the genital embrace could explode into dramatic 
brain-change. In the West, underground cults of Gnostics, 
Illuminati, alchemists and witches kept similar techniques as 
closely guarded secrets, for if the Holy Inquisition ever learned 
of such practices the participants would be denounced as devil- 
worshippers and burned at the stake. 

In our own time, there has been a revolutionary upsurge of 
these ancient neurological secrets, with an admixture of more 
modern techniques. Tantric teachers are available in many cities. 
Masters and Johnson use quasi-Tantric practices to treat sexual 
dysfunctions. As early >as 1968, a poll by McGlothlin showed 
that 85% of the pot-smokers in the country said their chief inter- 
est in the Weed was its function as enhancer of erotic sensation. 
Vibrators and other sexual toys proliferate; Gays come out of the 
closet; philosophers of a culture without repression (Norman 
Brown, Henri Marcuse, Charles Reich) become best-sellers. 

Saul Kent, a writer on medical science for general audiences, 
has even suggested that electronic sexual surrogates can and will 
be manufactured in the near future. (Your own Marilyn Monroe 
doll!) Instead of joining Tom Wolfe and the neo-puritans in 
throwing up our hands in horror at such an idea, let us consider it 
for a moment. Let us see if we can peek outside our imprinted 
conditioned reality-tunnel. 

If a sexual android is possible in 2005 or 2050 or whenever, 
why not a totally programmed sexual environment? Let us call 
this, in memory of Herman Hesse, the Magic Theatre. We start 
with what is concurrently available in high-priced brothels in the 
hedonic Sun Belt section of America. 



Prometheus Rising 


193 


Massage, a first-circuit tranquilizer, has all the advantages of 
the opiates without being habit-forming. Our Magic Theatre, 
then, would include computerized body-relaxers-and-energizers 
better than current massage techniques. 

Porn movies are available, for stimulation, in the better 
brothels. Our Magic Theatre would have them in 3D on all four 
walls, obviously. 

Marijuana and stimulants like cocaine or speed are available 
in brothels everywhere. Our Magic Theatre would have better 
chemical rapture-agents. 

One can go on adding details, according to personal fantasy, 
until one has created a room in which bliss can be extended in all 
dimensions, indefinitely. 

A strange thing has happened in constructing this cybemeti- 
cized brothel. We seem to have gone beyond sex to something 
that might be called meta-sex. While specific genital pleasure 
might still be fun, it is hardly as important as it seemed to us 
before we came into the multi-dimensional Pleasure Dome 
where all senses are stimulated to ecstasy. 

And the most peculiar thing about this bawdy science-fiction 
projection is that we don't even need to build a Magic Room. It 
is built into our brains already. We have been describing the 
positive neurosomatic consciousness which Freud called 
"polymorphous perversity" in one of his Puritan moods and "the 
oceanic experience" in one of his mystical moments. This is 
what the neurosomatically tumed-on brain feels like. 

In alchemy this was known as "the multiplication of the first 
matter" or "the Philosopher's Gold," which was unlike ordinary 
gold in that it could not be spent or used-up, since it perpetually 
multiplied and renewed itself. It is the "Third Eye" of the Illumi- 
nati tradition, which transforms all it sees; the eye of which Jesus 
speaks in his gnomic aphorism, 

"The light of the body is the eye; if therefore thine eye be 
single, thy whole body will be full of light." 

— Matt 6:22 


EXERCIZES 

1 . Get the lesson book from the local Christian Science Read- 
ing Room and read the lessons for a month. 



194 


Prometheus Rising 


2. Attend a Sufi week-end seminar. 

3. Acquire my book Sex & Drugs: A Journey Beyond Limits 
(New Falcon Publications) and try the Tantric exercizes there 
described. 

4. Learn how to do pranayama properly, from an expert. (1 
have tried describing this elsewhere, and have found there is no 
way to prevent gross errors in verbal transmission of this nonver- 
bal knowledge. Get a Hindu to show you.) 

5. Da Free John, an American guru, says you can reach 
Illumination by constantly asking, "Who is the One who is living 
me now?" Well — is it Circuit 1 consciousness, Circuit 11 ego, 
Circuit 111 mind. Circuit IV sex-role. Circuit V Gestalt-field, or a 
higher circuit? 

Who is it? Where is it? How old is it? 

6. Dr. Aiden Kelly has suggested that the so-called "uncon- 
scious" is more conscious than the so-called conscious mind. 
That is, the "unconscious" contains all the feedbacks of the 
neurosomatic circuit and the other circuits that maintain life. 
Consider this idea. Is this the "One who is living you now"? 



CHAPTER TWELVE 


THE COLLECTIVE 
NEUROGENETIC CIRCUIT 


It is no longer only the Right that is conservative. The entire Left is 
also suddenly conservative. The liberal and the radical Left have 
fallen behind. 

— F.M. Esfandiary, Upwingers 



195 




The sixth circuit of the brain kicks into action when the nervous 
system begins to receive signals from within the individual 
neuron — from the RNA-DNA "dialogue," the neurogenetic feed- 
back system. 

The entire nervous system, including the brain, has been 
designed like the rest of the body, by the "code" within the DNA 
molecule, which sends signals via messenger RNA molecules to 
tell the organism what to do: Grow red hair. Have blue eyes. 
Stand up and walk now. Start to talk. Find a mate. Etc. Our 
entire mental lives — our brain hardware and software — exist 
within the perimeters of this DNA master-tape. 

With neurogenetic consciousness, these DNA archives 
become accessible to brain scanning, while awake. (They are 
always accessible, as archetypes of the Jungian "collective 
unconscious," during dreaming sleep.) 

The first to achieve neurogenetic awareness, a few thousand 
years ago, spoke of "memories of past lives," "re-incarnation," 
"immortality," etc. That these neurological adepts were speaking 
of something real, in the best language of their day, is indicated 
by the fact that many of them (especially Hindus and Sufis) gave 
marvelously accurate poetic vistas of evolution millennia before 
Darwin and foresaw Super-humanity before Nietzsche. 

The Greeks called this "the vision of Pan," the Chinese "the 
great Tao,” Hindus “Atman consciousness." The numinous, 
awful, sublime "God" "Goddess" and "Demon" figures who 
appear in the initial stages of this Awakening are Jung's 
"archetypes of the collective unconscious" and are recognized as 
"victors from dream-time" by primitives, as "them from Sidde” 
by witches, as the Weird People in a thousand folk-traditions. 

Gurdjieff calls this circuit the True Emotional Center. 

The “akashic records" of Theosophy, the "phylogenetic 
unconscious" of Dr. Stanislaus Grof, the “Gaia hypothesis" of 
biologists Margulis and Lovelock — which holds that the 
biosphere of this planet is one intelligent organism — are three 
modern metaphors for this circuit. The visions of past and future 
evolution described by those who have had trans-time experi- 
ences during close-to-death or "clinical death" trauma also 
describe the Circuit VI neurogenetic reality-tunnel. 

Specific exercizes to trigger neurogenetic imprints are not to 
be found in yogic teaching; it usually happens, if at all, after 


197 



ig8 Prometheus Rising 

many years of expertise in the kind of advanced rajah yoga that 
develops Circuit V somatic bliss. Heavy does of LSD, of course, 
always trigger temporary Neurogenetic vistas. 

The neurogenetic circuit is best considered, in terms of 
current science, as the genetic archives activated by excitement 
of anti-histone proteins — the DNA memory coiling back to the 
dawn of life and containing also the genetic blueprints for the 
future of evolution. 

"I am He that was, and is, and shall be," a sentence from the 
Egyptian Book of the Dead, in hieroglyph and in his own hand- 
writing, was found on the desk where Beethoven composed the 
Ninth Symphony and all his later, aeon-spanning "evolutionary" 
music. One judges from this, and from the music itself, that 
Beethoven had opened the neurogenetic circuit. 

Here dwell primordial archetypes, far older than language yet 
newer than tomorrow, Personifying this circuit as a being, 
Crowley tells us: 

...The "Babe in the Egg of Blue" [cf., the final image of 
Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey- — R. A. W.] ...represents the 
Higher Self... The connection is with the symbolism of the 
dwarf in mythology.., In his absolute innocence and ignorance 
he is "the Fool"; he is the Savior... the "Great Fool" of Celtic 
legend, the "Pure Fool" of Act I of Parsifal ... heis also the 
Green Man of spring festivals... So we see him fully armed as 
Bacchus Diphues, male and female in one, the hisexual 
Baphomet, and... Zeus Arrhenothelus, equally bisexual... [He 
is shown in this full form in the Tarot Trump XV, "The 
Devil”]... But the "small person” of Hindu mysticism, the 
dwarf insane yet crafty of many legends in many lands, is also 
this same. . . Silent Self of a man, or his Holy Guardian Angel. 

These images are not poetic whimsies by Crowley. They 
reappear in the dreams of individuals (the personal myth of the 
night), in the myths of all peoples (the impersonal dreams of the 
species), and, of course, over and over in UFO contact stories. 


STUDY THE NEXT TWO IMAGES CAREFULLY 




Circuit VI neurogenet 
god, displaying the co 
human-animal seed-f( 


200 


Prometheus Rising 



Another archetype from the neurogenetic archives ("collective 
unconscious"). The Great Mother symbolizing the genetic 
memories as illustrated by the flower, bird. etc. 




Prometheus Rising 


201 


The "language" of this circuit is the multi-level language of 
Finnegans Wake, where Finnegan is Finn-again, Finn Mac Cool 
of Irish legend reborn and Huck Finn again also, sailing down 
"Missus Liffey,” both the river Anna Liffey in Ireland and Huck 
Finn's Mississippi; where Mark the Wan is King Mark, cuck- 
olded by Tristan, but Mark the Twy is Mark Twain, married to a 
wife he called “Livvy”just like the Irish river, and Mark the Tris 
is cuckolded Mark and cuckolding Tristan in one; while Marcus 
Lyons is all of them, plus Mark the apostle, his emblematic lion 
(always shown with him in medieval art), Leo the lion, Leo in 
the zodiac and all associated fire-signs, and one of the Four Old 
Men (Matt Gregory, Marcus Lyons, Luke Tarpey and Johnny 
McDougall) who haunt the dreamer all night long, symbolizing 
the four evangelists, the four bedposts surrounding the sleeper, 
the four antique circuits, the four suits of Tarot or ordinary 
playing cards, the four elements of the ancients, and all the other 
fours that Jung has found omnipresent in the "collective 
unconscious." To parallel the evolution of the first four circuits 
in human (and mammalian) history, Joyce also offers the four 
stages of the development of the “Gracehoper” (egg, larvae, 
chrysalis, adult) and such dream-logical quartifications as 
"eggburst, eggblend, eggburial, and hatch-as-hatch can," "their 
weatherings and their marryings and their buryings and their 
natural selections," "a human (pest!) cycling (pist ! ) and recycling 
(past!) and there he goes (pust!) again," etc. 

This archetypal circuit is replete with what Jung called 
synchronicities — meaningfulcoincidences — which he attributed 
to the circuit's roots in what he called the “psychoid” level, 
below the personal and collective unconscious, where "mind" 
and "matter" are not yet differentiated — the royal highway of the 
DNA-RNA-CNS (central nervous system) telegraph, in Tim 
Leary's metaphor. 

Such synchronicities are a sure sign that you are dealing with 
the neurogenetic circuit. For instance, in a Finnegans Wake study 
group, we were all convulsed with laughter when noticing that 
"Toot and Come Inn" is not just a parody of American cutesy-pie 
motel names but another of Joyce's countless puns on Tutankh- 
amen. At this point, my wife entered the room to enquire what 
was so funny. When we explained, she said, "That's a synchro- 



202 


Prometheus Rising 


nicity — I was just watching a TV program about Tutankhamen." 
And, of course, Joyce put the boy-king into the dream because 
the main theme of Finnegans Wake, the main theme of the 
neurogenetic circuit, is the survival of genetic memory through 
time, symbolized by the Resurrection myth; and Tut was dug up 
(resurrected) synchronistically, just after Joyce started work in 
this epic. 

As Joyce explains the logic of the neurogenetic circuit, "This 
ourth of years is naught save brickdust and being humus the 
same returns” (the earth gives back, in new forms, what is 
buried) since "on the bunk of our breadwinning lies the cropse of 
our seedfather” (comment superfluous, to those who know The 
Golden Bough) and “Phall if you but, will rise you must." The 
seed, the genetic code, and the egg, cellular wisdom, sends the 
signal down the aeons; in the similar metaphor of Nobel geneti- 
cist Hebert Muller, "We are all giant robots manufactured by 
DNA to make more DNA.” 

To the individual, the breaks in the chain of life/death 
/life/death/life/death are ail-too real and painful; to the seed-and- 
egg wisdom of the neurogenetic circuit, the seamless unity of 
lifedeathlifedeathlifedeathlifeis the greater reality. 

The neurogenetic circuit is probably located in the right neo- 
cortex and is more recent than the neurosomatic circuit in the 
back sections of the right cortex. 

Circuit VI neurogenetic consciousness allows you to 
"converse" with the evolutionary architect who designed your 
body — and billions and billions of others since the dawn of life 
around 3-4 million years ago. 

This "architect" is the greatest designer on this planet, as 
Bucky Fuller has often commented. No human architect has yet 
equaled Her efficiency or Her esthetics in such routine products 
as roses, eggs, insect colonies, fish etc. 

She (or He) can be personified in modern terms as Mother 
DNA or Father Nucleic Acid. The Rationalist immediately 
objects that such personification, however inescapable it is to all 
who have encountered the Architect directly on this circuit, is 
illegitimate, because She or He is unconscious. The rebuttal, 
given by all Circuit VI adepts in all cultures and all ages, is that 



Prometheus Rising 


203 


She or He is not unconscious but intoxicated, and it is a divine 
intoxication. 

Less poetically, whether we "humanize" this "architect" into a 
Big Momma or Big Daddy, or “animalize” it into a jackal- 
headed being like the Egyptian, or “ insectualize” it into a divine 
Preying Mantis like one African tribe, or “spiritualize” it into 
something totally abstract like Hindus and Christian Scientists, 
we are only depicting one cross-section of this 3-4 billion-year- 
old Being. When we “moleculize” it as DNA we are also only 
seeing one cross-section — the most useful cross-section for 
scientific analysis. That is all that needs to be said, or should be 
said, for the "scientific materialist" chemicalization of the 
biosphere, and it is no contradiction of direct experience of the 
Being itself via Circuit VI yogas, biological or chemical. Indeed, 
the direct experience undoubtedly can and has helped many 
scientists get a wider, more holistic view of what is going on in 
evolution, which they have brought down to Circuit III in better 
linguistic models. Teilhard de Chardin is one, but not the only, 
example of a scientist whose evolutionary model has been 
improved by such direct Circuit VI experience. 

For those who have not yet had Circuit VI experience — and 
most of humanity will possess the technology to turn on this 
circuit at will, within the next twenty years — this evolutionary 
perspective might, possibly, be conveyed by a series of quantum 
jumps in perspective, thus: 

The individual can make mistakes, even fatal ones. 
Consciousness of Circuits I-V is far from infallible; we all get 
into messes, and sometimes they kill us. 

The gene-pool can make mistakes, but less frequently. Most 
gene-pools have a life-span far beyond any individual, by a 
factor of many thousands. Obviously, if we judge intelligence by 
survival, gene-pools — made up of the information of many 
million individuals — are more "intelligent" than any individuals, 
even geniuses. (Einstein was not as smart as the Jewish people 
collectively. He created Relativity and was smart enough to 
escape the Nazis. The Jews, historically, created dozens of ideas 
as important as Relativity and survived hundreds of pogroms.) 



204 


Prometheus Rising 


The species is even more intelligent than the gene-pool. It 
lives millions of times longer than any individual, many thou- 
sand times longer than any gene-pool. 

The biosphere— Gaia — the DNA script — is more intelligent 
than all individuals, gene-pools and species. It has survived 
everything thrown at it for nearly 4 billion years, and is getting 
smarter all the time. It is on the edge of achieving immortality; 
through the sixth circuit it has a better eye to see itself and judge 
its trajectories than ever before; it is getting ready to leave this 
planet and expand across the universe. 

Beethoven, to cite him one more time, said "Anybody who 
understands my music will never be unhappy again." That is 
because his music is the song of the Sixth Circuit, of Gaia, the 
Life Spirit, becoming conscious of Herself, of Her powers, of 
Her own capacities for infinite progress. 

EXERCIZES 

1 . List at least 15 similarities between New York (or any 
large city) and an insect colony, such as a bee-hive or termite 
hill. (If you can't think of at least 15, read Edward Wilson's 
Sociobiology.) Contemplate the information in the DNA loop, 
which created both of these enclaves of high coherence and 
organization, in primate and insect societies. 

2. Read the Upanishads and every time you see the word 
“Atman” or "World Soul," translate it as DNA blueprint. See if it 
makes sense to you that way. 

3. Contemplating these issues usually triggers Jungian 
synchronicities. See how long after reading this chapter you 
encounter an amazing coincidence — -e.g., seeing DNA on a 
license plate, having a copy of the Upanishads given to you 
unexpectedly, seeing an image like Crowley's Pan or Great 
Mother in a work of popular art etc. 

4. Explain such a synchronicity, when it occurs, in Circuit III 
Rationalist terms— mere coincidence etc. 

5. Psychologist Barbara Honnegger explains synchronicities 
by saying that the right brain hemisphere (where this circuit is 
located) moves you in space-time to the place where the synchro- 
nicity will occur, while the Rationalist left brain invents rational- 
izations to go there. Synchronicities are a language through 



Prometheus Rising 


205 


which this circuit communicates with the left brain, in this 
theory. Try explaining coincidences by that theory. What 
messages is your right brain trying to send to your left brain? 

6. Jung and several of his disciples (e.g., Coleman, Steiger, 
Fiedler) have suggested that UFOs are messages from this 
collective DNA circuit to the left brain. What do such messages 
mean? What is the right brain trying to tell us? 




CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


INTRODUCTION TO THE 

METAPROGRAMMING 

CIRCUIT 


It is the human situation that is basically tragic. Right and Left 
revolutionaries cannot alter this basic dilemma. For instance, the 
most radical Left-wing group has no program to overcome death. 
The entire Right-Left establishment is still death oriented. 

— F.M. Esfandiary, Upwingers 





I once saw a cartoon — I forget where— that seems to me to 
summarize the central fact of neurological relativism. 

A cat approaches a dog and says "Meow." The dog looks 
confused. The cat repeats, "Meow!" The dog still looks con- 
fused. The cat repeats, more emphatically, “MEEOW!!!” Finally, 
the dog ventures, "Bow-wow?" The cat stalks away indignantly, 
thinking "Dumb dog!" 

Of course, human communication, and our great philosophi- 
cal debates, cannot be on this primitive level. Of course! 

Nonetheless... 

Between May and October, 1917, in Fatima, Spain, occurred 
the best documented series of "miracles" in modern history. As 
everybody knows, it began when three illiterate peasant girls had 
a vision of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Please note at once that it is 
easy, and tempting, for the Rationalist, and the non-Catholic 
generally, to treat this first incident as "merely" hallucination. 
Note next how hard it is to make that explanation stick as the 
subsequent details arc narrated. 

At the second "visitation of the Virgin" in June there were 
fifty witnesses. All agreed that they heard an explosion and saw a 
puff of smoke. (Only the three girls on this and subsequent occa- 
sions ever saw the Lady.) Shall we assume now that, in addition 
to hallucinating girls we must add a practicaljoker with a smoke 
bomb, to make sense of what was going on? 

At the third visitation in July there were 4500 witnesses. All 
of them heard an explosion again, at the Lady’s departure, and 
most of them claimed they heard humming and buzzing noises 
while the children spoke to her. (This humming and buzzing is 
common in later UFO stories...) 

On August 13, there were 18,000 witnesses, who saw, or 
hallucinated a symphony of weirdities, including flowers falling 
out of the sky, another explosion, bright flashes of light on the 
clouds and on the ground (crimson, pink, yellow and blue) and a 
luminous globe spinning through the sky, just like a modern 
UFO. 

On September 13, there were 30,000 witnesses. All saw the 
luminous "UFO" again, and there was another downpour — not 
flowers this time, but glistening globules of light that got smaller 
as they descended and "melted" near ground level. Dr. Carl 


209 



210 


Prometheus Rising 


Sagan would have solemnly told you, with his bare face hanging 
out, that all 30,000 witnesses were hallucinating simultaneously. 

October 13, the last "miracle" was witnessed by 70,000 at the 
scene, and 30,000 others for hundreds of miles around claimed 
to see some of the phenomena. Some said that the sun plunged 
directly toward the earth, but others that a globe "big and bright 
as the sun" had appeared and did the plunging. This was accom- 
panied by flashes of red, violet, blue and yellow, together with a 
"heavenly" perfume permeating the air. 

It is claimed that "thousands" of people were converted to 
Catholicism by these events. Please note that if it had all hap- 
pened 50 years later in 1967, many of these people would have 
been converted to the newer mystique of the Space Brothers. 

Nietzsche once said, "We are all greater artists than we real- 
ize." It is a function of the above record (and this book as a 
whole) to make that obscure joke totally clear to every reader. 

But, but, but — All 100,000 witnesses who saw some of the 
phenomena associated with the last Fatima "miracle" must have 
been hallucinating, of course. This is the most comfortable and 
conservative way of dealing with such events, and one does not 
have to be as narrow as Dr. Sagan to prefer such a simple expla- 
nation. Still. . .if 100,000 people can hallucinate simultaneously, 
and if, as history assures us, many millions can share a 
"religious" or political delusion simultaneously, only a man as 
rigidly dogmatic as Sagan can avoid asking the most disturbing 
questions about the origin of his own beliefs and perceptions. 

Cromwell once addressed the Irish rebels, saying, "I beseech 
you, in the bowels of Christ, think it possible that you might be 
wrong." History does not record that Cromwell ever addressed 
the same remark to himself. 

Each of us is trapped in the reality-tunnel (assumption- 
consumption) his or her brain has manufactured. We do not 
"see" it or "sense" it as a model our brain has created. We 
automatically, unconsciously, mechanically "see" and "sense" it 
out there, apart form us, and we consider it "objective." When 
we meet somebody whose separate tunnel-reality is obviously far 
different from ours, we are a bit frightened and always disori- 
ented. We tend to think they are mad, or that they are crooks 



Prometheus Rising 


21 1 


trying to con us in some way, or that they are hoaxters playing a 
joke. 

Yet it is neurologically obvious that no two brains have the 
same genetically-programmed hard wiring, the same imprints, 
the same conditioning, the same learning experiences. We are all 
living in separate realities. That is why communication fails so 
often, and misunderstandings and resentments are so common. I 
say "meow" and you say "Bow-wow," and each of us is con- 
vinced the other is a bit dumb. 

According to reliable statistics, over 100,000,000 citizens of 
the U.S. "believe in" UFOs and at least 15,000,000 have seen a 
UFO. The system of ideas, rumors, myths, hopes etc. clustered 
about the UFO phenomenon may be the most powerful sociolog- 
ical force for change currently acting upon our society, as Dr. 
Jacques Vallee recently stressed in an address to a special United 
Nations committee on the UFO mystery. 

The UFO debate, or quarrel, hinges upon the two categories 
which we find central to our thesis — the innocent-looking ideas 
of "inside" and "outside." Broadly speaking, the UFO "skeptics" 
are those who claim the UFO is "inside" the UFO observer 
("hallucination," misidentification, etc.), while the UFO 
"believers" claim the UFO is "outside" (objectivity). 

As the semanticist Alfred Korzybski often warned, when we 
split verbally that which is never split existentially we introduce 
fallacies into our thinking. Korzybski’ s favorite example was the 
matter of "space" and "time"; for in experience, we never 
encounter "space" without "time" or "time" without "space," i.e.. 
a year measures the space the Earth moves around the sun, and 
the space the Earth travels in one orbit gives us the time we call a 
"year." The verbal separation of "space" and "time" became 
such a problem in late 19th Century physics that paradoxes and 
contradictions multiplied endlessly; and this was only resolved 
when the genius of Einstein went back before the verbal cate- 
gories, realized we had created them, and started physics over 
from the ground up on the simple existential fact that we never 
encounter "space" or "time" separately but only the undifferen- 
tiated "space -time continuum." 

Applying this Einsteinian operational orientation to the UFO 
problem, we observe that we never hear of a UFO without a 



2/2 


Prometheus Rising 


human observer. In fact, even the UFOs "seen" on radar become 
UFOs (unidentified, rather than identified, flying objects) 
through processes of evaluation in the nervous system of the 
radar operator. 

It is, therefore, the Einsteinian and operational approach to 
accept the seamless unity of UFO-observer and cease to separate 
them into “UFO” and "observer." 

The types of "critters" who appear in human-UFO experi- 
ences include the following: 

Black men, blue men, green men, black-faced men with green 
bodies; 

Fish-scaled men, hairy dwarfs, huge-headed bald dwarfs, 
aimless humanoids; 

Dwarfs with three fingers, dwarfs with eight fingers, claw- 
handed men, one-eyed men; 

Elephant-eared men, long-haired sexless WoMen, man-apes, 
man-birds; 

Robots, beer-can shaped entities walking on fins, headless 
things, dwarfs in Nazi uniforms; 

Sinister "Greys" who engage in sexual and/or genetic tamper- 
ings with humans. 

This is only a partial zoology of the UFO experience. 

The craft favored by this odd crew includes big blobs of light, 
little blobs of light, clusters of lights, hard metallic ships, flat- 
bottom discs, conic discs, coin-like discs, domed discs, ovals, 
spheres, spheroids, cigar-shaped craft, cubes, tetrahedrons, cres- 
cents, "eggs," teardrop shapes, boomerangs. This is also a partial 
list. 

"We are being invaded by beings from dozens of galaxies," 
said Otto Binder, a believer in the extraterrestrial theory of 
UFOs, when this list was shown to him. 

One consistency does appear in this confusing picture: those 
who have had Close Encounters show marked personality 
change afterwards. At one extreme we find paranoid and 
schizophrenic breakdowns or acute anxieties requiring hospital- 
ization; at the other, "illuminations" similar to those of Buddha, 
Mohammed, Jesus, St. Paul. In the middle we find a great deal of 
messianic fanaticism typical of vulgar religiosity everywhere. 



Prometheus Rising 


213 


Other statistical clusterings can be found in the literature. 
Blinding lights are very common — do we recall St. Paul and the 
thousands at Fatima? And drumming and humming noises are 
also common — as in shamanism everywhere, at Fatima, and 
even in so sophisticated a brain-change system as Tibetan 
Buddhism. 

Let nobody underestimate this phenomenon just because it is 
irrational. It is equally irrational for 900 people to drink cyanide 
because a paranoid on pep-pills tells them to, and Nazism and 
the Holy Inquisition were equally irrational. As Dr. Jacques 
Vallee told the UN committee on UFOs, 

It is the third aspect of the UFO phenomenon which deserves 
full attention... The third aspect is the social belief system 
which has been generated by... the expectation of space 
victors. This belief. . .is creating new religious, cultural and 
political concepts of which social science has taken little 
notice. [Italics in original.] 1 

Rationalism-— a philosophy for which we have great sympa- 
thy, as for a backward relative — wants to take UFO "observers" 
by the collar, shake them vigorously and shout in their ears, 
"Look you so and so. It never happened! — you got it, buddy?" 
Well, maybe it didn’t — and then again maybe it did. In either 
case, UFO-observers are all better artists than they realize. 

It should also be obvious that the Rationalist is a better artist 
than he realizes. Amid millions of people who have or create 
such experiences every day in every city on the planet, the 
Rationalist has created a separate reality in which such things 
never happen — to him. 

Flying saucers and ESP (not to mention Fatima and its 
"miracles") may seem far removed from Patty Hearst's 

Dr. Carl Jung has compared the UFOs in general and Close Encoun- 
ters in particular with the "signs and wonders" that accompanied the 
breakdown of Roman paganism and the rise of Christianity. It is 
ironic to remember that the Rationalists of that time — the Stoics, 
Epicureans and other heirs of the Greek philosophical-skeptical tradi- 
tion-regarded Christianity with as much contempt as the modern 
Rationalist has for UFOs. They simply refused to look at what was 
happening, until their society was overcome by the paradigm shift to 
the new reality-tunnel. 



214 


Prometheus Rising 


"decision" to become a bank-robber. We are trying to show that 
there is an intimate connection between all the weirdities of 
consciousness. 

The process by which we construct a kitchen chair out of a 
whirl of atomic energy is just as creative (artistic) as the process- 
es by which Patty Hearst turned her father from a beloved parent 
into a Pig Imperialist. 

Your whole world has been constructed that way. You are 
"reconciled" to death because you have been told, all your life, 
that everybody must die. Only the Extropian minority — which 
can be found wherever scientists, science-fiction fans, Futurists 
and space enthusiasts gather — is living in the separate reality that 
claims we no longer have to accept this axiom of despair. 

The revolutionaries of any decade will become the reactionar- 
ies of the next decade, if they do not change their nervous 
system, because the world around them is changing. He or she 
who stands still in a moving, racing, accelerating age, moves 
backwards relatively speaking. Thus, there are hundreds of 
“Thanatological” seminars available in the once revolutionary 
but now-reactionary Consciousness Movement. These seminars 
are designed to reconcile people to death, and are about as reac- 
tionary as seminars c. 1860 designed to reconcile Black people to 
slavery. 

Only one offshoot of the Consciousness Movement, the Theta 
Seminars of Leonard Orr, are designed to prepare people for our 
oncoming immortality. 


EXERCIZES 

1. Buy a copy of Christian Science Sentinel and read all the 
faith healings reported that month. Note that each "miracle" is 
attributed to the correct teaching as transmitted by Jesus Christ 
and Mary Baker Eddy. 

2. Buy a copy of The Peyote Cult by anthropologist Weston 
LeBarre which attributes the same effects to auto-suggestion. 

3. Read Brain/M indBulletin for any recent year, and observe 
that similar healings are reported regularly and attributed to 
endorphins in the brain. 

4. Witnesses have testified that Jim Jones (like a few other 
professional faith-healers) used shills part of the time, a shill 



Prometheus Rising 


2/5 


being a person who pretends to be ill and pretends to be cured, in 
order to get the audience in the right frame of mind. Re-read all 
the miracles in the New Testament, using each of these filters: 
Jesus had the correct teaching; Jesus was using auto-suggestion; 
the sufferers' brains unleashed endorphins when Jesus gave them 
positive auto-suggestion; Jesus was a con-man using shills. 

Since you weren't there at the time, does your choice among 
these theories, or your combination of them, tell more about 
Jesus or more about your own favorite reality-tunnel? 

5. Did you ever really give a good trial to our exercize, "I can 
now exceed all of my previous hopes and ambitions?" Try it; and 
at the same time, try, "I can be healthier than I have ever been 
before." 




CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


THE META- 
PROGRAMMING CIRCUIT 


Man is ignorant of the nature of his own being and powers, Even 
his idea of his limitations is based on experience of the pad. There 
is therefore no reason to assign theoretical limits to what he may 
be, or what he may do. 

— Aleister Crowley, Magick 



2/7 




According to Alfred Korzybski, any "idea" or mental state is a 
brain circuit which the brain itself can contemplate, thereby 
having an idea about the idea, or a mental state about the mental 
state, etc. There is no theoretical or real limit to the higher-order- 
ing process; it is the "Infinity Within" of which mystics speak. 

Dr. John Lilly says, "In the province of the mind what is 
believed true is true or becomes true within limits to be learned 
by experience and experiment. These limits are further beliefs to 
be transcended. In the province of the mind there are no limits." 

Mind and its contents are functionally identical: My wife 
only exists, for me, in my mind. Not being a solipsist, I recognize 
the converse: I only exist, for her, in her mind. Lest the reader 
exclaim, like Byron of Wordworth, "I wish he would explain his 
explanation!”, let us try it this way: If I am so fortunate as to be 
listening to the Hammerklavier sonata, the only correct answer, 
if you ask me suddenly, "Who are you?" would be to hum the 
Hammerklavier. For, with music of that quality, one is hypno- 
tized into rapt attention: there is no division between "me" and 
"my experience." 

In heavy meditation, when I think of me, I am me; when I 
think of me and you, I am me and you; when I think of you 
alone, I am not there anymore; when I think of God, I am God. 
What I see with my eyes closed and with my eyes open is the 
same stuff: brain circuitry. 

Mathematician J.W. Dunne puts the matter in a parable. A 
painter, who had escaped from the asylum to which he was 
(justly or unjustly) confined, decided to paint the field in which 
he found himself. Finished, he looked at the result and realized 
that something was missing: namely, himself and his canvas, 
which were part of the field. So he started over and painted 
himself and his canvas in the field. But, examining the results 
with philosophical analysis, he realized that something was still 
missing: namely, himself and his canvas on which he was 
painting himself and his canvas in the field. So he started a third 
time., .and a fourth ....ad infinitum. 

We think of the paintings of M.C. Escher at this point: Or we 
recall the old folk-tale of the farmer who set out to market with 
ten donkeys, on one of which he rode. After a while, he began to 
wonder if any of the donkeys had strayed and he began counting 
there seemed to be only nine. Disturbed, he dismounted and 


2/9 



220 


Prometheus Rising 


walked around the herd, counting carefully— and there were ten 
after all. So he remounted and went on riding, until worry beset 
him again. So he counted another time. . .and there were nine. So, 
once again, he dismounted and walked about counting carefully 
to find ten. The process is repeated until he finally solves the 
problem, carrying one donkey on his back and driving the other 
nine before him. 

The "disappearing donkey" trick is the epitome of ideas about 
ideas about ideas, paintings of paintings of paintings, etc. The 
disappearing donkey is a synecdoche of the meta-programming 
circuit of the nervous system. 

The meta-programming circuit — known as the "soul" in 
Gnosticism, the "no-mind" (wu-hsin)in China, the White Light 
of the Void in Tibetan Buddhism, Shiva-darshana in Hinduism, 
the True Intellectual Center in Gurdjieff — simplyrepresents the 
brain becoming aware of itself. The artist seeing himself in his 
painting, seeing himself seeing himself in his painting... In the 
Zen metaphor, it is a mirror that reflects anything, but does not 
hold onto anything. It is a conscious mirror that knows it can 
always reflect something else by changing its angle of reflection. 

This is analyzed mathematically in G. Spencer Brown's Laws 
of Form; an analog, using not Brown's math but Godel’s, and 
employing illustrations from the music of Bach and the paintings 
of Escher, is Hofstadter's Godel, Escher, Bach. 

Most of the occult literature of the world — aside from the 
95% of it that is sheer rubbish — consists of tricks, gimmicks and 
games (which the Hindus call upaya, "clever ways") to trigger 
meta-programming consciousness. This generally means leading 
the student "all around Robin Hood's barn" as many times as are 
necessary, until the poor victim discovers that he has created the 
barn himself. 

For instance, a popular game with California occultists — I do 
not know its inventor — involves a Magic Room, much like the 
Pleasure Dome discussed earlier except that this Magic Room 
contains an Omniscient Computer. 

To play this game, you simply “astral ly project" into the 
Magic Room. Do not ask what "astral projection" means, and do 
not assume it is metaphysical (and therefore either impossible, if 
you are a materialist, or very difficult, if you are a mystic). Just 



Prometheus Rising 


221 


assume this is a gedankenexperiment , a "mind game." Project 
yourself, in imagination, into this Magic Room and visualize 
vividly the Omniscient Computer, using the details you need to 
make such a super-information-processor real to your fantasy. 

You do not need any knowledge of programming to handle 
this astral computer. It exists early in the next century; you are 
getting to use it by a species of time-travel, if that metaphor is 
amusing and helpful to you. It is so built that it responds imme- 
diately to human brain-waves, "reading" them and decoding their 
meaning. (Crude prototypes of such computers already exist.) 
So, when you are in this magic room, you can ask this Computer 
anything, just by thinking of what you want to know. It will read 
your thought, and project into your brain, by a laser ray, the 
correct answer. 

There is one slight problem. The computer is very sensitive to 
all brain-waves. If you have any doubts, it registers them as 
negative commands, meaning "Do not answer my question." So, 
the way to use it is to start simply, with "easy" questions. Ask it 
to dig out of the archives the name of your second-grade teacher. 
(Almost everybody remembers the name of their first grade 
teacher — imprint vulnerability again — but that of the second 
grade teacher tends to get lost.) 

When the computer has dug out the name of your second 
grade teacher, try it on a harder question, but not one that is too 
hard. It is very easy to sabotage this machine, but you don't want 
to sabotage it during these experiments. You want to see how 
well it can be made to perform. 

It is wise to ask only one question at a time, since it requires 
concentration to keep this magic computer real on the field of 
your perception. Do not exhaust your capacities for imagination 
and visualization on your first trial runs. 

After a few trivial experiments of the second-grade-teacher 
variety, you can try more interesting programs. Take a person 
toward whom you have negative feelings, such as anger, disap- 
pointment, feeling-of-betrayal, jealousy or whatever interferes 
with the smooth, tranquil operation of your own bio-computer. 
Ask the Magic Computer to explain that other person to you; to 
translate you into their reality-tunnel long enough for you to 



222 


Prometheus Rising 


understand how events seem to them. Especially, ask how you 
seem to them. 

The Poet Prayed: 

Oh would some power the giftie gie us 
To see ourselves as others see us 

This computer will do that job for you; but be prepared for 
some shocks which might be disagreeable at first. 

This super-brain can also perform exegesis on ideas that seem 
obscure, paradoxical or enigmatic to us. For instance, early 
experiments with this computer can very profitably turn on 
asking it to explain some of the propositions in this book which 
may seem inexplicable or perversely wrong-headed to you, such 
as "We are all greater artists than we realize" or "What the 
Thinker thinks, the Plover proves" or "mind and its contents are 
functionally identical." 

This computer is much more powerful and scientifically 
advanced than the rapture-machine in the neurosomatic circuit. It 
has total access to all the earlier, primitive circuits, and overrules 
any of them. That is, if you put a meta-programming instruction 
into this computer; it will relay it downward to the old circuits 
and cancel contradictory programs left over from the past. For 
instance, try feeding it on such meta-programming instructions 
as: 

1 . 1 am at cause over my body. 

2. 1 am at cause over my imagination. 

3. I am at cause over my future. 

4. My mind abounds with beauty and power. 

5. 1 like people, and people like me. 

Remember that this computer is only a few decades ahead of 
present technology, so it cannot "understand" your commands if 
you harbor any doubts about them. Doubts tell it not to perform. 
Work always from what you can believe in, extending the area of 
belief only as results encourage you to try for more dramatic 
transformations of your past reality-tunnels. 

This represents cybernetic consciousness; the programmer 
becoming self-programmer, self-metaprogrammer, meta-meta- 
programmer, etc. Just as the emotional compulsions of the 
second circuit seem primitive, mechanical and, ultimately, silly 



Prometheus Rising 


223 


to the neurosomatic consciousness, so, too, the reality maps of 
the third circuit become comic, relativistic, game-like to the 
metaprogrammer. 

"Whatever you say it is, it isn't, ” Korzybski, the semanticist, 
repeated endlessly in his seminars, trying to make clear that 
third-circuit semantic maps are not the territories they represent; 
that we can always make maps of our maps, revisions of our 
revisions, meta-selves of our selves. 

“Neti,neti" (not that, not that), Hindu teachers traditionally 
say when asked what "God" is or what "Reality" is. 

Yogis, mathematicians and musicians seem more inclined to 
develop meta-programming consciousness than most of human- 
ity. Korzybski even claimed that the use of mathematical scripts 
is an aid to developing this circuit, for as soon as you think of 
your mind as mind 1 , and the mind which contemplates that mind 
as mind 2 and the mind which contemplates mind 2 contemplating 
mind 1 as mind 3 , you are well on your way to meta-programming 
awareness. Alice in Wonderland is a masterful guide to the meta- 
programming circuit (written by one of the founders of mathe- 
matical logic) and Aleister Crowley soberly urged its study upon 
all students of yoga. 

R. Buckminster Fuller illustrates the meta-programming cir- 
cuit, in his lectures, by pointing out that we feel puny in compar- 
ison to the size of the universe, but only our bodies (hardware) 
are puny. Our minds, he says — by which he means our soft- 
ware — contain the universe, by the act of comprehending it. 

The seventh, meta-programming circuit is the most recent in 
evolutionary time and seems to be located in the frontal lobes. 
That is why the traditional Hindu exercize to activate it is to fix 
the consciousness in the front of the forehead and hold it there, 
hour after hour, day after day, year after year, until the metapro- 
grammer awakes and you begin to perceive-create infinite reali- 
ties where before there was only one static jail-cell "reality" in 
which you were trapped. 

As said above, this circuit is the "soul" of the Gnostics, as 
distinct from the self. The self seems to be fixed and firm, but is 
not; that is, whatever circuit you are operating on at the moment 
is your "self at that moment. If I point a gun at you, you go to 
Circuit I consciousness at once, and that is your "self at that 



224 


Prometheus Rising 


instant. But if you are sexually attracted to somebody, you go to 
Circuit IV and that is your "self until you are orgasmically 
satisfied (or hopelessly frustrated). Most of the preliminary exer- 
cizes in Sufi and Gurdjieff schools consist in making you aware 
that the "self is not constant but shifts back and forth between 
the imprints on the various circuits. 

The "soul" or Circuit VII is constant, because it is, as the 
Chinese say, void or no-form. It plays all the roles you play — 
oral dependent, emotional tyrant, cool rationalist, romantic 
seducer, neurosomatic healer, neurogenetic Evolutionary Vision- 
ary — but it is none of them. It is plastic. It is no-form, because it 
is all forms. It is the "creative Void" of the Taoists. 

If this begins to sound like nonsense, that is inevitable on this 
level. As Lewis Morgan notes, in books on linguistics there 
always comes a point at which the prose itself becomes wildly 
incomprehensible, disintegrating into nonsense. 

The same happens, Morgan notes, beyond a certain point in 
modern mathematics: 

Godel’s Theorem was once explained to me by a patient, a 
gentle mathematician, and just as I was taking it all in, 
nodding appreciatively at'thc beauty of the whole idea., .it all 
turned into nonsense inside my head. 

It happens in both linguistics and mathematics, because it 
happens in consciousness itself, language and math are just 
models of consciousness. 

"Mind" is a tool invented by the universe to see itself; but it 
can never see all of itself, for much the same reason that you 
can’t see your own back (without mirrors). Or as Alan Watts 
liked to say, because the tongue ultimately cannot taste the 
tongue. 

Ideas about ideas — mathematics about mathematics (Godel) 
— language about language — consciousness of consciousness — 
the whole seventh circuit brings us into what Hofstadter calls 
Strange Loops. Like the legendary ko-ko bird, we follow our 
own tail around in ever-narrowing circles, but unlike that mythic 
bird we never complete the process by flying up our own 
rectums and disappearing. It just seems like we’re about to self- 
destruct in that colorful way, and we decide that what we have 
been reading, or thinking, or perceiving, must be "nonsense." 



Prometheus Rising 


225 


It is not nonsense. We are merely confronting infinity where 
we least expected to encounter it — in our own lonely selves. 

Physics joined linguistics, mathematics and psychology in this 
mete programming hall of mirrors when Schrodinger demon- 
strated that quantum events are not "objective" in the Newtonian 
sense. For fifty years since then, physicists have been struggling 
to build a system that will get them out of this Strange Loop. The 
results have been as funny as a Zen koan. 

For instance, Niels Bohr proposed the Copenhagen Interpre- 
tation, which merely says, in the manner of Godel, that our 
equations do not describe the universe really. They describe the 
mental processes we have to put ourselves through to describe 
the universe. True enough — and this whole book is a Copen- 
hagen Interpretation of psychology and owes everything to Dr. 
Bohr, but we are still in a Strange Loop, and most physicists 
want to get out. 

Dr. John von Neumann proved that there was no way out. 
This is technically known as Von Neumann's Catastrophe of the 
Infinite Regress, and it merely shows that any device that will 
get us out of the first Strange Loop (the Copenhagen collapse of 
objectivity) will just lead us into a second Strange Loop; and any 
way out of that will lead to an inexorable third Strange Loop; 
and so on, forever. 

Everybody is still trying to refute von Neumann; but nobody 
has been successful. 

"I can't get out — my horns won't fit through the door. 

The meta-programming circuit is not a trap. As Joyce would 
say, it only looks as like it as damn it. Simply accept that the 
universe is so structured that it can see itself, and that this self- 
reflexive arc is built into our frontal lobes, so that consciousness 
contains an infinite regress, and all we can do is make models of 
ourselves making models... 

Well, at that point, the only thing to do is relax and enjoy the 
show. 

This is what the Flindus call Shiva-darshana, or the divine 
dance. You are still in life, or life is in you, but since there are 
infinite aspects to everything, especially to the "you" who is 
observing/creating all these muddles and models, there are no 
limits. 



22(5 


Prometheus Rising 


The only sensible goal, then, is to try to build a reality-tunnel 
for next week that is bigger, funnier, sexier, more optimistic and 
generally less boring than any previous reality-tunnel. 

And once you have built that bigger, funnier, happier universe 
of thought, build a bigger and better one, for next month. 

EXERCIZES 

1 . If all you can know is your own brain programs operating, 
the whole universe you experience is inside your head. Try to 
hold onto that model for at least an hour. Note how often you 
relapse into feeling the universe as outside you. 

2. Consider the belief system or reality-tunnel of an educated 
reader 1200 years ago — in 797 AD. How much of that tunnel 
still seems "Real"? How much in our reality-tunnel was un- 
known or invisible then ? 

3. Consider the reality-tunnel of an educated person 1200 
years from now — in 3197 AD. How much of our reality-tunnel 
will still seem "Real"? How much of the 3197 AD reality-tunnel 
is unknown or invisible to us? 

4. Re-read Moses’ encounter with I AM WHO I AM in 
Deuteronomy. Try the theory that Moses was talking to his own 
meta-programming circuit. 



CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


DIFFERENT MODELS & 
DIFFERENT MUDDLES 


It 1 is not just a riot of blots and blurs and disjointed jottings linked 
by spurts of speed. . . it only looks as like it as damn it. 

— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake 



1 Presumably the input (software) or the brain (hardware). Or both. 

227 




"REALITY" IS THE TEMPORARY RESULTANT OF 
CONTINUOUS STRUGGLES BETWEEN RIVAL GANGS 
OF PROGRAMMERS. 


And every moment is a new and shocking 
Transvaluation of all we have ever been. 

— T.S. Eliot, Four Quartets 


228 




When a paradigm shift occurs — when we go from seeing things 
one way to seeing them another way — the whole world is 
remade. All that we "know" is what registers on our brains, so 
what you perceive (your individual reality-tunnel) is made up of 
nothing but thoughts — as Sir Humphrey Davy noted when self- 
experimenting with nitrous oxide in 1819, and as Buddha noticed 
by sitting alone until all his social imprints atrophied and 
dropped away. 

The Copernican Revolution in astronomy, the Darwinian 
revolution in biology, the Relativity and Quantum revolutions in 
physics, have all been as shocking to those who lived through 
them as the Immortalist Revolution is today. 

You can live in the reality-tunnel imprinted upon you by 
environmental accident or you can choose your own. You can go 
through brain changes as radically bad as those of Patty Hearst 
and Rusty Calley, as transcendentally beautiful as those of 
Buddha and Jesus, as epistomologically revolutionary as those of 
Darwin and Einstein. 

You can join those who have already entered the Immortalist 
Reality Tunnel, the Scientologist Reality-Tunnel or the Commu- 
nist Reality-Tunnel. 

"There are a lot of different realities going around these 
days," Abby Hoffman once said. Evolutionary acceleration is 
forcing us to the point where each will have to take responsibility 
for which reality we accept. 

Fifteen million Americans are waiting, trustingly, for the 
Space Brothers to come down in their UFOs and enforce World 
Peace. 

The UFO is the, or an, extreme case. In general, everything we 
see is inside our heads. 


229 


230 


Prometheus Rising 


This is demonstrated by the well-known optical diagram 
encountered in every high-school physics class: 



The light rays from the external object are reflected through 
the lens of the eye onto the retina, and reversed in the process. 
The brain obligingly interprets the picture, turning it right-side- 
up, and editing it in other ways more subtle. 

What is true of vision is true of the other senses. What we 
know is what registers on the brain. This is the answer to the 
famous Zen Buddhist koan (riddle), "Who is the Divine Being 
who makes the grass green?" 

The brain, in the routine course of the before-mentioned 
100,000,000 programs per minute, takes in, edits, orchestrates, 
organizes, packages, labels etc. all raw "existential" experience 
and classifies it according to the neurological Dewey Decimal 
System. This system varies from society to society; hence, 
cultural relativism — what is "real" to the Eskimo is not quite the 
same as what is "real" to a New York taxi-driver. 

To review: Each individual has a neurological system, or 
game, different from other members of the same society. In 
accord with Einstein's physical relativism, and anthropology’s 
cultural relativism, we call this neurological relativism. 

The vegetarian does not "see" (experience) meat on a rack in 
the butcher shop the same way the meat-eater sees it. The racist 
does not see a member of another race as, say, that person's 
parents do. More generally, as the Poet tells us: "The Fool sees 
not the same tree that the Wise Man sees." 

Among the many editorial tasks of the brain, performed so 
rapidly and smoothly that we do not notice it, is the classification 
of the separate quanta of perception into "inside" and "outside." 
That this neat system does not accord with brute fact we learn 
from optics and neurology; that it can be abolished entirely, with 



Prometheus Rising 


231 


great profit in terms of insight, we leam from the type of meta- 
programming experience called dhyana in the Hindu and 
Buddhist traditions. 

Crowley says of the dhyana experience: 

In the course of our concentration we noticed that the contents 
of the mind at any moment consisted of two things, and no 
more: the (external) Object, variable, and the (internal) Sub- 
ject, invariable, or apparently so. By success in dharana 1 the 
object has been made as invariable as the subject. 

Now the result of this is that the two become one. This 
phenomenon usually comes as a tremendous shock. 

In our words, "mind" (whatever that is) and its contents are 
functionally identical. The usual system of classifying the con- 
tents as "me" (part of "mind") and not-”me” ("outside") can be 
abolished — notjust by meditation, but by certain well-known 
drugs — and the unity of the field of perception is then recog- 
nized. We become Metaprogrammers. 

This is what we might expect from the triumphs of field 
theory and general systems theory in sociology, anthropology, 
quantum theory etc. It still comes as a distinct shock when it is 
experienced notjust talked about. When "I" and "my world" 
(field of perception) become one, "I" am transformed utterly, as 
in "in a refiners' fire," as the mystics say. 

This sounds a bit puzzling to the average person without ex- 
perience in brain-change games. Try this illustration: Assuming 
you are reading this in your own home, look around the room. 
Note that everything in your field of vision — furniture, paintings 
or posters on the walls, stereo set or absence of same, rugs, TV 
or not TV, etc. — is, in a sense, your creation or co-creation. You 
and/or your spouse or room-mates(s) selected everything that got 
into the room. You also selected or co-selected that particular 
room, out of the millions of rooms on this planet where you 
might otherwise live. The tunnel-reality of that room, then, in a 
very real sense has been "created" or "manifested" by you, out 
of a universe of infinite possibilities. 


Silent meditation on one object for many weeks, like the Zen monk 
with the ox. 



232 


Prometheus Rising 


Of course, only the most fanatic Freudian or Buddhist mystic 
would claim your whole life history has been similarly 
"selected" by you. But, stop and think a moment: the life-history 
you think you have, the part that is stored in your brain as 
"memory," has certainly been selected. You can't even remem- 
ber everything that happened in the last five minutes. If you try 
to be inwardly silent (passive; non-verbal) and notice everything 
happening in your field for one minute, you are overwhelmed by 
thousands of impressions that you cannot catalog and retain. 

Conclusion: who you are, and what you think you are, is a 
creation edited and orchestrated by your brain. 

Everybody you meet is an "artist" who has made a similar 
creation. 

And these creations are, all of them, as diverse and idiosyn- 
cratic as the musical styles of Bach, Beethoven, Rock, Wagner, 
Vivaldi, Bizet, Orff, Chopin, John Cage, Soul, the Beatles, Harry 
James, Disco, Scotch folk-songs, African chants... 

As for the universe "outside" you: of course, you didn't create 
that. But just because you didn 't create it, you can never know 
it... except approximately. What you do know, and consider "the 
universe outside" is another paid of your brain, which has made 
of its circuits a model which you identify with the universe 
outside. 

These models are as varied and miscellaneous as the paintings 
of Botticelli, Rembrandt, Van Gogh, Picasso, Paul Klee, Wyeth. 
Dali, Monet... 

This the meaning of the notion that mind and its contents are 
functionally identical. 

Consider the old folk-rhyme: 

I saw a man upon the stair, 

A little man who wasn't there. 

He wasn’t there again today; 

Gee, I wish he'd go away. 

This little man is a semantic spook; he exists only in the 
language, and yet once the language has invoked him it almost 
seems to make sense to wish he would go away. 

Recent advances in semantics, semiotic, linguistic analysis, 
foundations of mathematics, logic, etc. have demonstrated that 



Prometheus Rising 


233 


our conceptual field — our symbolic environment — is haunted by 
many such "spooks." 

There are Empedoclean paradoxes, of which the classic is: 


EVERYTHING IN THIS BOX IS FALSE 


Theologians are vexed by questions like: Can an omnipotent 
God create a rock so heavy He Himself cannot lift it? (If he 
cannot, he is not omnipotent; and if he can, he is also not omnip- 
otent.) Philosophers and physicists are still bothered by: what 
happened before Time began? Somebody is supposed to have 
remarked, "I'm glad I don't like cauliflower, because if I liked it, 
I'd eat it, and I hate the stuff." Alice in Wonderland, and any 
treatise on mathematical logic, will provide hundreds of exam- 
ples of similar mind-benders. 

A Zen saying sums it all up: 

"To think that I am not going to think of you anymore is still 
thinking of you. Let me then try not to think that I am not 
going to think of you." 

Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead attempted to 
resolve all such conundrums with a mathematical proposition 
known as the Theory of Types. Unfortunately, it was quickly 
pointed out that either (a) the Theory of Types refers to itself, in 
which case it limits itself by its own terms, and does not solve all 
our semantic problems, or (b) the Theory of Types does not refer 
to itself, in which case there are propositions to which it does not 
refer, and it is again limited, and we are left with our problems. 

These third-circuit perplexities are of more than technical 
logical and philosophical import. Many situations in real life take 
the form of our being haunted by our own semantic spooks. For 
instance, the popular novel, Catch-22, deals with a very real 
Empedoclean knot: the hero can escape from the war if he can 
prove his is crazy, but if he attempts to do this it will prove he is 
sane, since it is sane to escape a dangerous situation. 

The logic of the dream-world of Finnegans Wake is not so far 
from real life, either. A patient, of German birth, at St. Eliza- 
beth's hospital, would not walk through doors, explaining “Da 
fressen mich die Turen.’’ ( The doors will eat me.) This makes 




234 


Prometheus Rising 


perfect sense phonetically, since it is identical in pronunciation 
with “Dafresseimich die Tieren. ” (The animals will eat me). 

Word-magic? Schizophrenia? The average person, not a vege- 
tarian, will respond positively to "tender juicy filet mignon” on 
the menu; but not to "a piece off of a dead castrated bull." But 
the two expressions mean the same thing. 

We all tend to conjugate sentences in the manner caricatured 
by Bertrand Russell: "I am firm. You are obstinate. He is a pig- 
headed fool." ("1 am daring and original. You are pretentious. 
She stinks." "1 am flexible. You bend with the wind. They're a 
bunch of opportunists.”) 

The magic of poetry creates "real toads in imaginary gar- 
dens," it has been said. When Robert Burns writes: 

The wan moon is setting behind the white wave 
And Time is setting with me, oh 

it is hard not to feel that the abstraction "time" has become as 
real as the physical moon and wave — or the little man upon the 
stair. 

Consider the following table: 


COLUMN I 

Nigger-loving busy-body 
Smutty book 

Daring and original theory 
Sexist enterprise 
Woolly-headed liberal 
Sound, sensible economics 


COLUMN II 

Civil libertarian 
Realistic Novel 

Wild and implausible speculation 
Dealer in rare and exotic art 
Passionate humanitarian 
Stingy, tight-assed idea 


Any phrase in column I can describe persons or events that 
might very well be described, by a different speaker, with the 
corresponding phrase in column II. Now the reader may feel that 
some of the phrases above are so pejorative, so loaded with prej- 
udice, that only the most ignorant or bigoted would use them; but 
that is irrelevant. What needs to be noted is that it is easy to see 
the bias in somebody else’ s semantic maps, but not so easy to see 
the bias in one’s own semantic reality-tunnel. If the reader were 
born in Arkansas in the 1920s, item 1 in Column I might seem 



Prometheus Rising 


235 


the natural, accurate, normal way to refer to the first NAACP 
worker to appeal - and try to organized the Blacks. 

These matters are symbolic, but more than linguistic. For 
example, the proverbial Englishman who dressed for dinner 
every night in his lonely tropical hut was no fool. He was keep- 
ing an English third-circuit reality bubble around him. to avoid 
becoming engulfed in the reality-bubble of the natives. See what 
happens to Kurz in Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness when the 
African reality-tunnel overwhelms his European reality-tunnel. 

It only takes a few weeks in prison to become "a convict," 
whatever your definition of yourself was before, it only takes a 
few weeks in the Army to become a "soldier." 

These remarks are another elucidation of our earlier statement 
that mind and its contents are functionally identical. The symbol- 
izing process is such that, once set in motion, it is virtually 
impossible (without subtle neurological know-how) to escape 
from a reality-tunnel one has created for oneself or had foisted 
upon one by the environment. 

Kurt Saxon is the author of The Poor Man's Janies Bond, a 
manual that tells you everything you could ever want to know 
about practical techniques of murder and mayhem, The Survivor, 
a four-volume extension of the same libretto, telling where to 
acquire any possible type of weapon, Root Rot, a diatribe against 
Alex Haley for implying that slavery was unfair to Black people, 
and several similar books. Mr. Saxon does not get reviewed in 
the Liberal magazines that decide which authors are important, 
but he has a wide readership among the Apocalyptical sects of 
the right-wing end of the political spectrum. 

Mr. Saxon wrote in the 1970s that the United States would be 
destroyed almost totally by 1982. This is because the govern- 
ment has driven the “competents” out of business by excessive 
taxation and has subsidized 30 million "incompetents" on Wel- 
fare and another 30 million "incompetents" on Social Security. 
This country has thus become, Saxon says, "a Disneyland for 
dummies." 

By 1982, Saxon said, the whole economy would collapse. 
"Millions of taxpayers will be unemployed... Millions who are 
now on Valium or other tranquilizers will go insane when they 
cannot get more. Drug addicts (will) swarm over pharmacies 



236 


Prometheus Rising 


looking for dope, ruining everything they don't steal..." We will 
be helpless against Russian attack because "our politicians have 
so devoted themselves to nurturing. . .incompetent dependents 
that further industrialization to put our nation on a war footing 
will be unaffordable. Even if it were not, our present union- 
spoiled and demanding work force cannot be expected to 
perform the way our parents did in the war plants of the late 
1930s and early 1940s." The only solution, Saxon informs us, is 
to buy farms, order his books on how to kill people efficiently, 
and stockpile every type of weaponry, to fight off the "drooling 
imbeciles and parasites" who will flee the doomed cities and try 
to steal your crops. 

Mr. Saxon believed that these are objective predictions based 
on hard "laws” of sociology and economics which he learned 
from the writings of Ms. Ayn Rand. He did not believe that this 
apocalyptical reality tunnel in which he lives is in any way an 
artistic creation expressing his own emotional anxieties and 
hostilities. 

John White believes that the earth will shift on its axis some 
time before 1999. There will be "massive loss of life" and civi- 
lization will be almost totally destroyed. The only hope you 
have, he says, is to retreat to a farm (a la Mr. Saxon) where you 
will probably be wiped out anyway but have some advantage 
over city-people in that you won't have tall buildings falling on 
you when the Pole Shift sets off earthquakes everywhere. 

Mr. White believes that these are objective predictions based 
on eternal "laws" of karma which he learned from various 
occultists and gurus. He does not believe that the apocalyptical 
reality-tunnel in which he lives is in any way an artistic creation 
expressing his own emotional anxieties and hostilities. 

Mr. White also believes that many UFOs are actually demons, 
and that after the Pole Shift kills us off, most of us will go to 
"Hell," which is not eternal, fortunately, but only "timeless." 

If we confront the world without ideas we see only a muddle, 
the formless void that existed before "God" (intellect) started to 
create a universe (a system) in Genesis. 

Once we become the "image of God" by making our own 
universe, we have a model of the muddle. The model is very 



Prometheus Rising 


237 


convenient — we could not be human without it — but it is also 
very misleading whenever we forget that we have created it. 

None of the reality-models discussed in this chapter, however 
bizarre they may seem to some readers, are any more arbitrary 
than the official reality-model known as consensus-reality, which 
is a statistical average and not nearly consensual as it seems. 
Travel 100 miles in any direction, and the consensus begins to 
crumble. Travel 1000 miles and very little consensus is left... 

"The peoples of the earth are islands," said the late Clement 
Atlee, "shouting at each other over oceans of misunderstanding." 
Each island is a separate reality-tunnel created by (a) our culture, 
(b) our sub-culture and (c) by the myth-maker or artist in each of 
us who is the adamantine individuality that makes you and me 
unique human selves not replicable units like the ants in a hive. 

Robert Anton Wilson is the author of Cosmic Trigger, Schro- 
dinger's Cat, Sex & Drugs and several other books. Like Mr. 
Saxon and Mr. White, Wilson does not get reviewed in the 
Liberal magazines that decide which authors are important, but 
he has a wide readership among science-fiction fans, political 
Libertarians and veterans of the Consciousness Revolution. 

Wilson believes that life extension techniques and intelligence 
raising drugs will be discovered in this decade, and will be 
widely available by 2010. Less radical than Dr. Silverstein, 
Wilson does not expect immortality to be achieved until the 
middle of the next century — but he expects life-extension drugs 
will keep him around until then. 

Wilson expects most of humanity will have migrated off 
Earth into space cities by 2028. He expects that with higher 
intelligence and longer lives than past humanity, these post- 
terrestrials will gradually become Superhuman by comparison 
with our historical average. 

Wilson believes that these are good guesses based on scien- 
tific probabilities, but he does not think there are any hard 
economic or karmic laws guaranteeing them. He recognizes that 
this reality-tunnel was generated by his own brain, that he is the 
artist who created it, and that it expresses his own hopes and 
desires, as well as scientific probabilities. It is, he knows, the 
reality-tunnel that keeps him happy, creative, busy and full of 
zest for life. 



Prometheus Rising 


He doesn't think it is any crazier than anybody else's reality- 
tunnel, and he claims it is a lot more fun than any other. 

EXERCIZES 

1 . Using the four circuit model, try to guess which specific 
imprints created Mr. Saxon's reality-tunnel. 

2. Apply the same analysis to Mr. White and Mr. Wilson. 

3. Apply the same analysis to Jesus, Hitler, Walt Whitman 
and your own father and mother. 

4. Write a criticism of this chapter from the viewpoint of 
Christian Fundamentalism. 



CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


THE SNAFU PRINCIPLE 


...the peculiar nature of the game... makes it impossible for 
[participants] to stop the game once it is under way. Such situations 
we label games without end. 

— Watzlawick, Beavin, Jackson, 
Pragmatics ofHuman Communication 



239 


COMMUNICATION IS ONLY POSSIBLE BETWEEN EQUALS 


DOMINANCE 

“HERRENMORAL” 



SUBMISSION 

“SKLAVMORAL” 


This is second-circuit neuro-politics. 

They shall come to know good. 

— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake 


240 



Mammalian sociobiology, rooted in the antique neural circuits of 
the old brain, contains many factors opposing the evolution of 
domesticated primates into true freedom and objective intelli- 
gence. 

The chief of these "reactionary" factors was described in my 
novel Illuminatus! as the Snafu Principle or Celine's Law. It 
holds that communication is only possible between equals. 

This was an over-simplification for fictional (satirical) pur- 
poses. More precisely, this proposed "law" would read: 

Adequate communication flows freely between equals. Com- 
munication between non-equals is warped and distorted by 
second-circuit Domination and Submission rituals perpetu- 
ating communicationjam and a Game Without End. 

Political power, as a typical alpha male once said, grows out 
of the barrel of a gun. This is metaphorically as well as literally 
true. The "gun" may be symbolic and fairly abstract, consisting 
of ritualized social expectations ("Don't talk back to your 
father") or concrete in a non-violent but deadly way, e.g., the 
capacity to remove bio-survival necessities by cutting off the 
ticket supply in a Capitalist society ("One more word and I'll fire 
you, Bumstead!”). 

Under the primate second-circuit socio-biological rules, 
everybody tends to lie a little, to flatter or to evade displeasure, 
when exchanging signals with those above them in the pack- 
hierarchy. 

Every authoritarian structure can be visualized as a pyramid 
with an eye on the top. This is the typical flow-chart of any 
government, any corporation, any Army, any bureaucracy, any 
mammalian pack. On each rung, participants bear a burden of 
nescience in relation to those above them. That is, they must be 
very, very careful that the natural sensory activities of being 
conscious organisms — the acts of seeing, hearing, smelling, 
drawing inferences from perception, etc. — are in accord with the 
reality-tunnel of those above them. This is absolutely vital; pack 
status (and "job security") depends on it. It is much less 
important — a luxury that can easily be discarded — that these 
perceptions be in accord with objective fact. 

For instance, in the FBI under J. Edgar Hoover, the agent had 
to develop a capacity to see godless communists everywhere. 
Any agent whose perceptions indicated that there were actually 


241 



242 


Prometheus Rising 


very few godless communists in this country at that time would 
experience cognitive dissonance — his or her reality-tunnel was at 
variance with the "official" reality-tunnel of the pyramid. To talk 
about such perceptions at all would be to invite suspicions of 
eccentricity, intellectual wiseacreing or of being oneself a 
godless communist. 

The same would apply to a Dominican inquisitor in the mid- 
dle ages who lacked the capacity to "see" witches everywhere. In 
such authoritarian situations, it is important to see what the Top 
Dogs (alpha males) see; it is inconvenient, and possibly danger- 
ous to see what is objectively happening. 

But this leads to an equal and opposite burden of omniscience 
upon those at the top, in the eye of the pyramid. All that is 
forbidden to those at the bottom — the conscious activities of 
perception and evaluation — is demanded of the Power Elite, the 
master class. They must attempt to do the seeing, hearing, 
smelling, etc. and all the thinking and evaluating for the whole 
pyramid. 

But a man with a gun (the power to punish) is told only what 
the target thinks will not cause him to pull the trigger (write the 
pink slip, order the court-martial). The elite, with their burden of 
omniscience, face the underlings, with their burden of nescience, 
and receive only the feedback consistent with their own precon- 
ceived notions and reality-tunnels. The burden of omniscience 
becomes, over time, another and more complex burden of 
nescience. Nobody really knows anything anymore, or if they do, 
they are careful to hide the fact. The burden of nescience 
becomes omnipresent. More and more of sensory experience 
becomes unspeakable. 

As Paul Watzlawick notes, that which is objectively repressed 
(unspeakable) soon becomes subjectively repressed (unthink- 
able). Nobody likes to feel like a coward and a liar constantly. It 
is easier to cease to notice where the official tunnel-reality 
differs from existential fact. Thus SNAFU accelerates and rigidi- 
tus bureaucraticus sets in — the last stage before all brain activity 
ceases and the pyramid is clinically dead as an intellectual entity. 

We also propose that "national security" is another semantic 
spook, an Empedoclean knot; that the search for national security 



Prometheus Rising 


243 


is the chief cause of national insecurity and a potent anti-intelli- 
gence mechanism. 

As Leary writes: 

Secrecy is the original sin. Fig leaf in the Garden of Eden. The 
basic crime against love... The purpose of life is to receive, 
synthesize and transmit energy. Communication fusion is the 
goal of life. Any star can tell you that. Communication is love. 
Secrecy, withholding the signal, hoarding, hiding, covering up 
the light is motivated by shame and fear. 

As so often happens, the right wing is half right for the 
wrong reasons. They say primly: if you have done nothing 
wrong, you have no fear of being bugged. Exactly. But the 
logic goes both ways. Then FBI files, CIA dossiers. White 
House conversations should be open to all. Let everything 
hang open. Let government be totally visible. The last, the 
very last people to hide their actions should be the police and 
the government. 

What my eminent colleague states so poetically can be stated 
more functionally as follows: 

Every secret police agency must be monitored by an elite 
corps or secret-police-of-the-second-order. This is because 
(a) infiltration of the secret police, for purposes of subversion, 
will always be a prime goal of both internal subversives and 
hostile foreign powers and (b) secret police agencies acquire 
fantastic capacities to blackmail and intimidate others, in and out 
of government. Stalin executed three chiefs of the secret police 
in a row because of this danger. As Nixon so wistfully said in a 
Watergate transcript, 

Well, Hoover performed. He would have fought. That was the 
point. He would have defied a few people. He would have 
scared them to death. He had a file on everybody. [Italics 

added.] 

Thus, those who employ secret police agencies must monitor 
them, to be sure they are not acquiring too much power. 

Here a sinister infinite regress enters the game. Any elite 
second order police must be, also, subject to infiltration, or to 
acquiring "too much power" in the opinion of its masters. And so 
it, too, must be monitored, by a secret-police-of-the-third-order. 



244 


Prometheus Rising 


In brief, once a government has n orders of secret police 
spying on each other, all are potentially suspect, and to be safe, a 
secret police of order n plus 1 must be created. And so on, 
forever. 

In practice, of course, this cannot regress to mathematical 
infinity, but only to the point where every citizen is spying on 
every other citizen or until the funding runs out. 

National Security, in practice, must always fall short of the 
logically Empedoclean infinite regress it requires for perfect 
"security." In that gap between the ideal of "One Nation under 
surveillance with wire taps and urine tests for all," and the 
strictly limited real situation of finite resources and finite fund- 
ing, there is ample encouragement for paranoias of all sorts to 
flourish, both among the citizens and among the police. 



IUONPCR,. THAT'S \ 
GotHfeoN 86H1UO S 
SACK- XHCFO 
Hofrc Col" 3 « J 


THE BURDEN OF OMNISCIENCE 
or: Why you can't reach the Court 
or the Castle in Kafka's allegories 

Thus, the USSR after 62 years of Marxist secret police games 
reached the point where the alpha males were terrified of paint- 
ers and poets. 



Prometheus Rising 


245 


In spying-and-hiding transactions, worry leads to more worry 
and suspicion leads to more suspicion. The very act of participat- 
ing, however unwillingly, in the secret police game — even as 
victim, or citizen being monitored — will eventually produce all 
the classic symptoms of clinical paranoia. 

The agent knows who he is spying on, hut he never knows who 
is spying on him. Could it be his wife, his mistress, his secretary, 
the newsboy, the Good Humor man? 

If there is a secret police at all, in any nation, every branch 
and department of government, and institutions which are not 
even admitted to be parts of government, becomes suspect in the 
eves of cautious and intelligent people as a possible front for, or 
tunnel to, the secret police. That is, the more shrewd will recog- 
nize that something bearing the label of HEW or even Interna- 
tional Silicon and Pencil might actually be the CIA or NSA in 
disguise. 

In such a deception network, conspiracy theories proliferate. 
Rumor is necessary, it has been found, when people cannot find 
"official" news sources that can be trusted to tell them what is 
really going on. The present author, having worked in the civil 
rights movement, the anti-war movement, the legalize-pot 
movement and other dissident causes, has repeatedly been 
approached by friend A with dire warnings that friend B is 
almost certainly a secret police agent, only to be told later and 
independently by friend C that friend A is a secret police agent. 
It requires delicate neurological know-how to keep one's sense 
of humor in the secret police matrix. 

The more omnipresent the secret police, the more likely it is 
that intelligent men and women will regard the government with 
fear and loathing. 

The government, on discovering that growing numbers of 
citizens regard it with fear and loathing, will increase the size 
and powers of the secret police, to protect itself. 

The infinite regress again appears. 



246 


Prometheus Rising 



SUSPICION LEADS TO MORE SUSPICION 


Prometheus Rising 


247 


The only alternative was suggested sarcastically by play- 
wright Bertolt Brecht (who was hounded by U.S. secret police as 
a communist and by East German secret police, later, as not 
sufficiently communist). "If the government doesn't trust the 
people," Brecht asked innocently, "why doesn't it dissolve them 
and elect a new people?" No way has yet been invented to elect a 
new people, so the government will instead spy on the existing 
people with increased vigor. 

Every secret police organization is engaged in both the collec- 
tion of information and the production of misinformation, euphe- 
mistically called "disinformation." That is, you score points in 
the secret police game both by hoarding signals (information 
units) — hiding facts from competitors — and by foisting false 
signals (fake information units) on the other players. This creates 
the situation I call Optimum SNAFU, in which every player has 
rational (not neurotic) reasons for suspecting that each and all 
may be trying to deceive him, gull him, con him, dupe him and 
generally misinform him. As Henry Kissinger is alleged to have 
said, anybody in Washington who isn't paranoid must be crazy. 

Maybe the UFOs really exist objectively — or maybe the 
whole UFO phenomenon is a cover for a secret police disinfor- 
mation ploy. Maybe there are Black Holes where space and time 
implode — or maybe Black Holes were invented to befuddle 
Russian scientists and send them into "little man who wasn't 
there" semantic spookery. Maybe Jimmy Carter really exists — or 
maybe he is, as National Lampoon once claimed, an actor named 
Sidney Goldfarb trained to project an attractive down-home 
"image." Perhaps only three alpha males at the top of the 
National Security pyramid really know the answers to these 
questions — or perhaps these three are being deceived by certain 
subordinates, as Fyndon Johnson was deceived about Vietnam 
by the CIA. 

Such is the neuro-sociological "logic" of a Disinformation 
Matrix. It is, as Paul Watzlawik has demonstrated, the logic of 
schizophrenia. 

Fess than ten years after the secret police game was estab- 
lished here by the National Security Act of 1948, the books of 
Dr. Wilhelm Reich were burned in a New York incinerator by 
government order. This was a shocking sight to some of us, who 



248 


Prometheus Rising 


remembered that we had recently fought a long war against Nazi 
Germany for, among other things, their crime "against civiliza- 
tion" of burning books. Shortly thereafter, Dr. William Ivy, 
former head of a department at Chicago Medical School, was 
subjected to ten years of legal harassment for espousing a radical 
cancer cure. More recently, Dr. Timothy Leary was sentenced to 
38 years imprisonment for espousing controversial ideas about 
neurotransmitter chemicals and reimprinting the nervous system. 
Now there is a war on against holistic physicians. 

It does not matter whether any or all of these "heretics" were 
right or wrong. Scientific truth is only determined after a genera- 
tion or more of research; it is not determined by throwing the 
dissenters in prison or burning their books. The point is that the 
secret police game immediately creates the social context for a 
return to the mechanisms of the Holy Inquisition. 

The intelligence of the whole society — the communication 
networks through which information is received, decoded and 
transmitted — is the first casualty. 

"I feel great and I send fraternal greetings to Dr. Andrei 
Sakharov in Russia," said Dr. Leary on emerging from prison, 
registering the fact that the mechanisms of the police state are the 
same everywhere, as are the myths that protect them. "Good 
Russians" believed Dr. Sakharov was a half-crazed alcoholic, 
just as "Good Americans" believed Dr. Leary was a half-crazed 
dope-fiend. 

I once proposed in a magazine article that the UFO is caused 
by some unusual electromagnetic or gravitational field fluctua- 
tion; and that this geophysical anomaly creates (a) real energy 
disturbances — jumping furniture, electrical failures, ball-light- 
ning making odd lights in the sky, etc. and (b) disturbance in the 
brain functioning of animals and humans in the afflicted area, 
causing the well-documented animal panics and the rather obvi- 
ous human hallucinations occurring in such areas. 

Statistical support for this theory will be found in Persinger 
and Lafreniere who have run computer-analyses of common 
patterns in 1,242 UFO cases and 4,818 other "abnormal" reports 
— “poltergeists,” “teleportations,” "miracles" and "mysteries" of 
all sorts. This data demonstrates that both UFOs and other 
energy anomalies tend to cluster along earthquake faults with 



Prometheus Rising 


249 


some peaking before earthquakes. Persinger and Lafreniere also 
suggest that the geophysical forces at work create both real 
oddities (jumping furniture, etc.) and hallucinations, so that it is a 
job of nice and exquisite discrimination to attempt to find out 
what was really going on. 

It has also been proposed, by the learned Dr. Jacques Vallee, 
astronomer, cyberneticist and physicist, that the UFO phenome- 
non is being created by a secret police agency as an elaborate 
"cover" for a complex disinformation system. 

A combined Wilson-Persinger-Lafreniere-Vallee theory, 
probably fitting more of the data than the separate theories, 
would suggest that the UFO phenomenon is the synergetic prod- 
uct of some geophysical oddity which created weird energy fluc- 
tuations and brain-change experiences in humans on the scene, 
and is being manipulated after the fact by one or more 
"intelligence" agencies, or by groups even more esoteric. 

Consider this scenario: 

Something weird happens. Assume that it is the geophysical 
abnormality and brain-change trauma we posit, but grant also 
that it might be the alien spaceship beloved by folk-myth. The 
following events are equally likely, whatever the weirdity "really 
was." 

As soon as the witnesses start talking, All Interested Parties 
converge on the area. Intelligence Agent Moe comes to conceal 
evidence that it might have been a spaceship — that is the policy 
of his agency, for their own reasons. Intelligence Agent Joe also 
arrives to plant evidence that it was a spaceship — that is the 
policy of his agency, since they are doing just what Dr. Vallee 
suspects. (The British Double Cross Bureau, in World War II, 
engaged in equally complex and absurdist dramas, seemingly 
totally unrelated to their actual work, but serving as disinforma- 
tion screens for that work.) Philip Klass and other Skeptics 
arrive, too, trying to reduce everything to "hallucination," even if 
eyes are burned, cars wrecked, etc. The Space Freaks, who may 
or may not be infiltrated by associates of Intelligence Agent Joe, 
are soon there, too, to get the facts to fit their Benign Space 
Brothers reality-tunnel. Various occultists are there, too, to fit it 
all into their own mythos of angelology, demonology, etc. 



250 


Prometheus Rising 


What we are saying is that every conspiracy regards itself as 
an affinity group — men and women who share the same goals 
and work together well. When you and I do it, it is just an affin- 
ity group. When that gang over there does it, it is a damnable 
conspiracy. 

True conspiracy does exist when a group conceals evidence, 
spreads deliberate misinformation and coerces or terrorizes wit- 
nesses. Any affinity group approaches such behavior to the 
extent that members reinforce each other's participation in the 
group reality-tunnel, especially concerning such crucial episte- 
mological matters as what is important enough to notice and 
discuss as against what is trivial and better ignored. How coer- 
cive do we have to be to intimidate witnesses? Most people, as 
our Snafu Principle explains, are easily led to reporting what an 
Authority Figure wants to hear. 

But let us consider the UFO syndrome further, as illustrating 
the whole spectrum of brain-change, and brain-programming. 

UFO contactees frequently show positive neurosomatic turn 
on, the bliss-out experience; some even become faith-healers or 
leaders of occultist groups. Others show negative neurosomatic 
effects— light is unbearable, as in schizophrenia, anxiety attacks 
may require hospitalization, etc. 

Meta-programming consciousness (the ability to choose 
between alternative reality-tunnels) is also reported, in crude 
metaphors about "parallel universes," "other realities," occultish 
jargon. 

Neurogenetic (Jungian "collective unconscious") visions are 
common, ranging from demons, hairy dwarfs etc. to the Space 
Goddess or Lady of the Stars of ancient and Catholic iconog- 
raphy. 

Even meta-physiological (quantum-level) experience is 
reported in the UFO literature, ranging from trans-time trips and 
"out-of-body experiences" to seeming, or alleged, teleportations. 

It must be emphasized most strongly that both positive and 
negative visions on all these circuits are common in UFOlogy. It 
seems that if the Programmers mean us well, they are acciden- 
tally doing ill to many: and if they mean us ill, as Dr. Vallee 
thinks, they are accidentally doing well to some of us. But this is 
true of all brain-change technology. 



Prometheus Rising 


251 


It seems that Vallee's monistic conspiracy theory is inade- 
quate, as monistic conspiracy theories are inadequate in politics. 
It is more likely that the UFO experience, like the other brain- 
change experiences we have studied, are sometimes spontaneous 
and sometimes programmed; and that there are rival gangs of 
programmers with radically different goals in mind for 
humanity. 

When Dr. Leary and I first published a neurological analysis 
of the Patty Hearst case in OI//magazine, the editors introduced 
it with a dramatic headline: 

The fight for Patty Hearst’ s mind is the overture to a world- 
wide battle for the control of consciousness. 

Not quite. The Hearst case would more appropriately be con- 
sidered a bar near the end of the second movement of the Mind 
War symphony. The first movement was the primitive neuro- 
science of ancient and medieval tyrants who acquired a great 
deal of pragmatic know-how about the effects of isolation, terror 
and intimidation; and of shamans and occultists who learned how 
neuro-chemicals can alter perceived reality-tunnels. The second 
movement began with modern psychology, with Freud, Pavlov, 
Jung, Skinner etc., climaxing with the LSD revolution and the 
discovery by millions that reality-tunnels could be radically 
mutated— temporarily and sometimes permanently — by neuro- 
chemistry. 

The third movement is the growingly obvious warfare 
between those who would program all of us, and those of us who 
wish to become our own Metaprogrammers. 

EXERCIZES 

1 . Start collecting evidence that your phone is bugged. 

2. Everybody gets a letter occasionally that is slightly dam- 
aged. Assume that somebody is opening your mail and clumsily 
resealing it. 

3. Look around for evidence that your co-workers or neigh- 
bors think you're a bit queer and are planning to have you 
committed to a mental hospital. 

4. Try living a whole week with the program, "Everybody 
likes me and tries to help me achieve all of my goals." 



252 


Prometheus Rising 


5. Try living a whole month with the program, "1 have chosen 
to be aware of this particular reality." 

6. Try living a day with the program "I am God playing at 
being a human being. I created every reality I notice." Assume 
that "GOD" is the answer to Da Free John’s question, "Who is 
the one who is living you now?" 

7. Try living forever with the metaprogram, "Everything 
works out more perfectly than I plan it." 



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


QUANTUM EVOLUTION 


What is man? A bridge between the ape and the Superman — a 
bridge over an abyss. 

— F.W. Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra 



253 



Another perspective on domesticated primate evolution is pro- 
vided by Alvin Toffler’s The Third Wave. 

For convenience Toffler reduces the muddle of human history 
into a model of three waves. It would be more accurate to refer 
to these "waves" as quantum jumps in energy-coherence level. 

Tire First Wave, Toffler says, took millennia to occur, but it 
finally transformed the larger part of humanity from the tribal 
stage (simple hunting-gathering primates) to the stage of large- 
scale agricultural-feudal civilizations. 

The Second Wave came much faster and, in a few centuries, 
transformed almost all of humanity from feudal-agricultural 
cottage economy to industrial-urban-market economy. 

The Third Wave, Toffler says, continues the trend toward 
acceleration and will happen in only a few decades. We call it 
"the information explosion," "the post industrial economy," etc. 

Each wave is faster, by a factor of 10, than the previous wave. 
And each wave is more total in that it changes more people, 
changes them more completely, and in the process transforms 
our concept of human nature and human society. 

Each wave that Toffler describes can be considered a new 
quantum state, with energy levels and reality-dimensions lacking 
in the previous state and totally unpredictable from the previous 
state. 

The First Wave mutated tribal men and women into serfs (or 
into Lords and Ladies). It created a whole new social manifold 
that is so subtle and pervasive that anthropologists and sociolo- 
gists can spend years studying its invisible aspects. And yet this 
transformation is so enormous that it is also visible to the most 
untrained eyes: you can't confuse a tribal human with a feudal 
human anymore than you can confuse a dog with a donkey. 

So, too, the Second Wave created what Toffler wittily calls 
“indust-reality,” manifesting as industrial men and women who 
are visibly, tangibly, as different from feudal or tribal humans as 
dolphins are from rose bushes or armadillos. 

The Third Wave, which began when Shannon and Wiener 
defined information and Von Neumann designed the first pro- 
grammable computer, is well under way already. Home comput- 
ers became as common as TV sets by the mid-1980s. Now the 
Net — computers "talking to" computers- — is doubling every four 
months. This transformation, again, will be total: it will create a 


255 



256 


Prometheus Rising 


whole new "man," a new "woman," a new "child," a new "self," 
new "society," a new concept of "work" and "energy" and 
"reality," etc. 

The average Man or Woman of 1997 will be as obsolete in 
2007 as the medieval serf is now. What we consider normal jobs, 
normal social roles; normal "humanity" will be as archaic as a 
horde of alchemists, smithies, Town Criers, courtiers and barber- 
surgeons arriving in our midst today. 

Of course, Toffler does not claim that the computer is the 
whole of the Third Wave, but merely that it is the synecdoche or 
paradigm of what is happening. In this sense, the factory was the 
synecdoche of the Second Wave. It was not merely the agent by 
which “indust-reality” spread across the world and multiplied 
our collective wealth (and illth); it also became the model for 
everything else. Our schools are mini-factories or models of 
factories because their main job was, when they were founded, to 
prepare people for factory work. The schools, in fact, were 
necessary because, while feudalism does not require literacy of 
the masses, industrialism does. Similarly, offices were modeled 
on factories, and kept factory-hours, even when this had little or 
nothing to do with how ..the offices could most efficiently be 
managed. And in general, "indust-reality," the reality of the 
industrial age, moved everybody into the robot lockstep of the 
factory system. 1 

"Indust-reality" is still so pervasive that it is, as McLuhan 
noted, mostly invisible. For instance, the feudal age never 
progressed beyond chamber music — trios, quartets etc. The 
modern symphony, with its huge orchestra, its Promethean 
themes, its god-like conductor ("capitalist"), its concert-master 
(foreman), its string section moving in harmony with its brass 
section, etc. is a beautiful artistic expression of modes of mass 

A free-lance writer can obviously work any hours, but the very 
successful (and very excellent) John D. MacDonald said in a recent 
interview that he always writes from nine to five, because it seems 
"natural" to him. The factory time-clock has gotten into Mac- 
Donald's neurons. The present author, after 20 years in factory-like 
offices works any hours of the day or night when "the spirit" moves 
him, but never starts at nine or stops at five, to avoid relapsing into 
the habits of his past. 



Prometheus Rising 


257 


human organization appearing usually in less beautiful forms in 
the factory assembly-line. (The factory also demanded cities — 
massive concentrations of labor in one place — which made the 
symphony economically possible. The aristocrat could not 
afford, and/or could not conceive, keeping more than the very 
few musicians necessary for chamber music.) 

Beethoven's "cosmic optimism" not only expresses the Age 
of Reason out of which indust-reality emerged; the very 
orchestras he wrote for were paradigms of industrial styles of 
organization. 

Of course, industrialism (the Second Wave) produced much 
illth along with its new wealth; and most of the wealth was ex- 
(or appropriated by a minority. However much this may pain 
socialists, it was inevitable in a domesticated primate species. A 
few alpha males can always see their own advantage more 
clearly than the majority can see their collective interest. 

Nonetheless, as indust-reality has spread, socialism has 
followed in its wake. Whether the reader likes this or not (and 
the author, being up-front about his prejudices, admits that he 
does not like it), this also is inevitable. When huge wealth is 
palpably being created in vaster accumulations than ever before 
in history, there is sure to be increased grumbling against the 
alpha males, and more attempts to seize what they have selfishly 
ap- (or expropriated. Even among baboons this pattern has 
been observed: the alpha male who is too obnoxious gets beaten 
up by a coalition of younger males and thrown out of the pack to 
forage alone. 

Neither capitalist indust-reality nor socialist indust-reality 
have been able to give humanity what most of us really want: 
liberty and justice, freedom and the abolition of poverty, contin- 
ued growth and continued security. In looking at capitalism vs. 
socialism, we are always confronted with a dilemma, not a 
choice. 

The Third Wave can, and will, transcend this problem within 
industrialism. The Third Wave will be neither capitalist nor 
socialist, nor some milkwater blend of the two. It will demand a 
whole new economy, just as feudalism created an economy 
unknown to tribal humanity and industrialism created the two 
competing economies of capitalism and socialism, both 



Prometheus Rising 


unguessed and unpredictable from the perspective of the feudal 
stage. 

In 1977, Dr. Ilya Prigogine won the Nobel prize in physical 
chemistry. 

Perhaps he should have won a Nobel prize for intelligent 
optimism. 

Dr. Prigogine’s work deals with the processes we have been 
discussing — the emergence of negative entropy (coherent order) 
out of stochastic processes — but he has taken a giant leap beyond 
the pioneering insights of Schrodinger, Weiner, Shannon and 
Bateson. 

Any organized system, according to Prigogine, exists in 
dynamic tension between entropy and negentropy, between 
chaos and information. The more complex the system, the 
greater is its instability. Prigogine demonstrated this mathemati- 
cally, but in everyday terms, what he means is that, for instance, 
it is easier to lead two children through a department store than 
twenty children. Or: A toothpick "house" of 101 pieces is less 
stable than a smaller toothpick "house" of 10 pieces. 

Instability is not always bad: in fact, it is absolutely necessary 
for evolution to occur. Inse'ct societies are highly stable and have 
not evolved at all in several million years. Human societies are 
highly unstable and are in continuous evolution. 

Prigogine demonstrates the evolutionary value of instability 
by his concept of the “dissipative structure. ” 

A dissipative structure is highly complex and therefore highly 
unstable. The more complex it is, the more unstable it is, mathe- 
matically, certain/v; and the more unstable, the more likely it is 
to change — to evolve. 

All dissipative structures are teetering, perpetually, between 
self-destruction and re-organization on a higher level of infor- 
mation (coherence). 

If that sounds grim, it isn't really. Prigogine's math is highly 
optimistic, He shows that the more complex structures— such as 
our world-round human society today, midway between Second 
Wave indust-reality and the emerging Third Wave — are mathe- 
matically more likely, much more likely, to "dissipate" into 
higher coherence than into self-destruction. 



Prometheus Rising 


259 


In other words, in the intellectual conflict between Utopians 
and Dystopians, the mathematical odds actually are on the side 
of Utopians. Our human world is so information-rich (coherent) 
that it is almost certain to "collapse" into even higher coherence, 
not into chaos and self-destruction. 

Prigogine is the mathematical demonstration of McLuhan’s 
intuition that many seeming symptoms of breakdown are actually 
harbingers of breakthrough. 

A note to confirmed pessimists: Prigogine’ s analysis is based 
on probability-theory and, hence, is not certain. Thus, if you 
have found these lyrical pages unduly alarming, take comfort in 
the thought that, although human success is highly probable, 
there is still a small chance that we can blow ourselves up or that 
your favorite apocalyptic scenarios might still occur, despite the 
general trend toward higher coherence and higher intelligence. 

Meanwhile, of course, even if humanity seems condemned to 
overall success, you can still mess up your personal life. Nothing 
in this book is an attempt to prevent the really resolute misery- 
addicts from continuing their pursuit of frustration and failure. 

The latest cosmological evidence indicates that our sun and its 
planets, including Earth, condensed out of a cloud of galactic 
dust and gas about five or six billion years ago. 

It appears that the first forms of unicellular life — the first 
dawnings of Circuit I bio-survival “consciousness”- — appeared 
about 3.4 billion years ago. 

Vertebrates began to appear — with Circuit II emotional-terri- 
torial consciousness — about 0.5 billion years ago (500 million 
years ago). 

The emergence of Circuit III human intelligence — language 
and “thought” — seems to have begun about 100,000 years ago. 
The fully human domesticated primate, Homo Sapiens, with 
Circuit IV "moral" consciousness may be about 30 thousand 
years old, or even more recent. Circuits V-VIII have appeared 
within historical times. 

All of these figures are subject to revision as science ad- 
vances, but the rough proportions between them are not likely to 
be changed much, and these proportions are staggering. 

As has often been pointed out, if we condense this evolution- 
ary scenario into a 24-hour day, beginning at midnight, life itself 



26 o 


Prometheus Rising 


does not appear until a little before noon, and all of human 
history (from the grunting, club-wielding ape men of Africa to 
Neil Armstrong setting foot on the moon) occurs in the last half 
of the last second before midnight strikes again and the day ends. 

This model is misleading in that it assumes the present is an 
"end," which is highly unlikely. Even without Space Migration, 
the life span of earth's biosphere is expected to be somewhere 
between 10 and 15 billion years more, before the Sun ceases to 
support life here. Taking the Sun's expected life span of about 20 
billion years as our model to be mapped onto a single day, we 
find that it's now around eight in the morning. Life has been 
mostly unconscious until now — operating on auto-pilot, as it 
were — but in the last million years (the last few seconds on this 
model) signs of consciousness and Awakening are beginning to 
appear. 

"The universe is so constructed as to be able to see itself," 
Spencer Brown once noted. The emergence of the neurosomatic, 
neurogenetic and meta-programming circuits is the universe's 
way of "seeing itself ever more clearly and totally, to decide 
where it is going. 

Dr. Isaac Asimov notes' in his Genetic Code that there seems 
to be a 60-year cycle between the first understanding of a new 
scientific principle and the transformation of the world by that 
principle. 

For instance, Oersted discovered electromagnetic equiva- 
lence — the fact that electricity can be converted to magnetism, 
and magnetism to electricity — in 1820. Sixty years later, in 1880, 
electrical generators were in wide use and the Industrial Revolu- 
tion had peaked; the telegraph and telephone were already 
invented, and our age of Mass Communication was dawning. 

Similarly, in 1883, Thomas Edison first noted the so-called 
"Edison effect” — the key to electronic, as distinct from electri- 
cal, engineering. 60 years later, in 1943, electronic technology 
was appearing everywhere; its primitive form in the entertain- 
ment sphere, radio, had enjoyed a 20-year triumph and was about 
to be phased out by television. 

In 1896, Becquerel noted the radioactivity of uranium. Sixty 
years later, two cities had been destroyed by atomic bombs and 



Prometheus Rising 


261 


nuclear plants were beginning to be built. (This was a contribu- 
tion to illth, not wealth.) 

In 1903, the Wright Brothers got their monoplane off the 
ground for a few minutes. Sixty years later, in 1963, jetliners 
carrying over 100 passengers were normal. 

Assuming, gambling, guesstimating that this 60-year cycle is 
normal, we can predict: 

Shannon and Weiner created the mathematical foundations of 
cybernetics in 1948. Sixty years later, in 2008, cybemetization of 
the world, as complete as the electrification of the 19th Century, 
will have jumped us to a new energy-level, a new social reality, 
as Tofflerpredicts. 

Hoffman discovered LSD and the chemical control of con- 
sciousness in 1943. Sixty years later, in 2003, every alteration in 
consciousness imaginable will be possible by ingesting the 
proper chemicals. 

McKay had the first success in expanding life-span of labora- 
tory rats in 1938. Sixty years later, in 1998, longevity pills may 
be routinely available in all drugstores. 

DNA was identified in 1944. Sixty years later, in 2004, every 
type of genetic engineering should be as routine as electronic 
engineering is today. 

The latest attempt to estimate the rate of information accelera- 
tion— the manifestation of coherence — was made by French 
economist Georges Anderla for the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 1973. 

Anderla arbitrarily assumed that all the bits of information 
possessed by humanity at the beginning of the Christian Era 
(1 AD) could be considered his unit of measurement. He made 
that information pool one unit in our fund of knowledge. 

It took until 1500 AD, Anderla discovered, for the accumula- 
tion of bits of information to add up to two units in our "fund." 

It required only 250 years more (to 1750) for our bank of 
knowledge to double again, to four units. 

The next doubling took 150 years and by 1900 humanity had 
8 units in its information capital account. 

The next doubling took only 50 years and by 1950 we had 16 
units. 



262 


Prometheus Rising 


The next doubling took only 10 years and by 1960 we had 32 
units. 

The next doubling took seven years and by 1967 we had 64- 
units. (This was coincidentally the height of th e first Youth 
Revolution, when reality maps began breaking down everywhere 
on the planet and wild new maps were hurtling at us from all 
directions.) 



THE INFORMATION EXPLOSION 

In the next six year period (1967-1973), our intellectual bank 
account again doubled, to 128 units. At this point, Anderla com- 
pleted his study. 

Dr. Alvin Silverstein has estimated that, if Anderla’ s graph is 
projected ahead seventy years human knowledge should increase 
a millionfold. That is, we should have 128,000,000 times more 
knowledge than we had in the year of Jesus' birth. 



Prometheus Rising 


263 


Longevity drugs will probably arrive in time for you to live 
through the biggest evolutionary quantum jump of all. 

It is only reasonable to assume that the higher circuits of the 
nervous system — neurosomatic holistic awareness, neurogenetic 
evolutionary vision, meta-programming flexibility — are develop- 
ing to allow us to cope with this deluge of higher information 
and potential higher coherence. 

Toffler’s Third Wave is only the sociological aspect of a 
mutation that is also biological and "spiritual." 

We are going to live a lot longer than we have expected, and 
we are going to get a lot smarter. 

A whole new reality will emerge from those mutations. 

EXERCIZES 

1 . Make a list of ten areas in which your thinking-feeling is 
conservative. Guess how soon the world will change so totally 
that those ideas will seem not merely conservative but irrelevant 
(as the theological debates of 300 AD now seem irrelevant). 

2. Make a list of ten areas in which your conceptualizing is 
radical. Guess how soon the world will change so totally that you 
will seem conservative in those areas. 

3. Accept the longevity hypothesis. Imagine you are going to 
live at least 300 years. How much of that time do you want to 
spend loafing? How many different jobs would you like to work 
at? How many sports, arts or sciences you never had time for, 
would you then find the time to enjoy? 




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


THE NON-LOCAL 
QUANTUM CIRCUIT 


The ways of the Creator are not our ways, Mr. Deasy said. All 
history moves toward one great goal, the manifestation of God. 

— James Joyce, Ulysses 



265 



A domesticated primate philosopher on an oxygen-supported 
carbon based planet circling a Type G star — namely, the present 
author — was once asked, "How do we think?" 

"Well, we have a built-in bio-survival circuit which distin- 
guishes nourishment-giving Things from predatory Things...” 

"But can that circuit do all our thinking?" 

"Well, no, but then there's an emotional-territorial circuit..." 

"But, but, but — ” 

“It’scircuits-circuits-circuits all the way," I said. 

What the Thinker thinks, the P rover proves. 

We have made a beautiful (we hope beautiful) model of 
consciousness in terms of brain hardware and software. Now we 
need to remember again that, while the brain can be modeled by 
a computer, the model is never the whole system. The model- 
maker or metaprogrammer is bigger than the model or program. 

In what are called "out of body experiences" (OOBEs) by 
parapsychologists, awareness seems to escape the confines of the 
nervous system entirely. 

Such experiences are routinely triggered by advanced yoga 
practice, and they also occur spontaneously during what is called 
"near-death" or "clinical death" in which the patient appears to 
die, by all medical standards, but is revived by modern resuscita- 
tion techniques. 

OOBEs also occur with heavy does of LSD and with keta- 
mine, an anesthetic with strange psychedelic side-effects. They 
are also reported in shamanic traditions all over the world and by 
many "occultists" in our own society. 

Example: One day in 1973, during a neuro-programming 
experiment, I "saw" something happening to my son at exactly 
that time in Arizona, over 500 miles away. 

We can process this datum in various ways. We can say that 
my "astral body" actually traveled to Arizona; this is the occultist 
theory. We can more conservatively say that I developed extra- 
sensory perception and "saw" Arizona without "going" there; 
there are many parapsychologists who prefer this third-circuit 
map of the 8th-Circuit experience. We can try to aver that I only 
"happened" to think of that scene while it was happening, by 
synchronicity; this is the Jungian approach. Or we can sweep it 
under the carpet by muttering "mere coincidence" or "sheer 
coincidence;” which is the traditional Rationalist approach. 


267 



268 


Prometheus Rising 


We prefer to say, in accord with earlier writings of Timothy 
Leary and the present author and the speculations of the Physics/ 
Consciousness Research Group in San Francisco that such cases 
illustrate a special working of what is called in quantum mechan- 
ics Bell's Theorem. 

Bell's Theorem is highly technical, but in ordinary language it 
amounts to something like this: There are no isolated systems: 
every particle in the universe is in "instantaneous" (faster-than- 
light) communication with every other particle. The Whole 
System, even the parts that are separated by cosmic distances, 
functions as a Whole System. 

Now, such faster-than-light communication seems to be 
forbidden by Special Relativity, which makes a problem. Bell's 
Theorem, however, is inescapable: a theorem in physics is not a 
mere "theory"; it is a mathematical demonstration which must be 
true, if the mathematics contains no flaw, and if the experiments 
on which it is based are replicable. Bell's Theorem contains no 
mathematical flaw, and the experiments are replicable and have 
been replicated several times. 

And yet we cannot dispense with Special Relativity either, 
because the mathematics there is equally flawless and the exper- 
iments are legion that confirm it. 

Two solutions have been proposed and both assume that the 
"communication" involved in Bellian transmissions does not 
involve energy, since it is energy that cannot move faster than 
light. Dr. Edward Harris Walker suggests that what does move 
faster than light, and holds the Whole System together, is "con- 
sciousness." We may eventually be forced to accept this, in 
which case physics will have justified pantheism or at least pan- 
psychism. The other alternative, proposed by Dr. Jack Sarfatti, is 
that the medium of Bellian transmissions is information. 

Pure information, in the mathematical sense, does not require 
energy; it is that which orders energy. It is the negative of 
entropy, that which brings disorder to energy systems. 

Dr. Sarfatti explains his theory as follows: 

Imagine that your brain is a computer, as modem neurology 
suggests. Now imagine that the whole universe is a big com- 
puter, a mega-computer, as John Lilly has proposed. Then 
imagine that the sub-quantum realm, the realm of what Dr. 



Prometheus Rising 


269 


David Bohm calls ‘hidden variables' is made up of mini-mini- 
computers. Now, the hardware of each ‘computer’- — the uni- 
verse, your brain, the sub-quantum mechanisms — is localized. 
Each part of it is somewhere in spacetime, here not there, now 
not then. But the software — the information — is non-local. It 
is here, there and everywhere; now, then and everywhen. 

The highest varieties of shamanic and yogic consciousness 
seem to begin from dilation beyond the immediate ("out-of- 
body-experience") and dilate, rapidly and dizzily, much further, 
to union with the smallest and the largest — the "Cosmic Mind" 
in short. This seems to be what would necessarily happen if the 
brain turned on to the non-local information system proposed by 
Sarfatti and implicit in Bell's Theorem. 

The meta-physiological circuit, then, is this cosmic Informa- 
tion System. The synchronicities of circuits V to Vll are just the 
dawning notes of the symphony of all inter-related harmonies 
revealed to those who have experienced Circuit VIII in action. It 
is hard to avoid hyperbole when talking of such matters, but 
everything one can associate with the idea of Oneness With 
God — or Oneness with “Everything”— is part of what is experi- 
enced in the vistas, beyond space-time, of this meta-physiologi- 
cal circuit. 

Mystics stammer, gibber and rave incoherently in trying to 
discuss this. Beethoven says it for all of them, without words, in 
the fourth movement of the Ninth Symphony. The words of 
Schiller's "Ode to Joy," which Beethoven set to this virtually 
superhuman music, are a linear third-circuit map conveying only 
a skeleton key to the multi-level meanings of the 8-circuit 
"language" of the melodic construction itself, which spans all 
consciousness from primitive bio-survival to meta-physiological 
cosmic fusion. 



2JO 


Prometheus Rising 


CL on 

o^sno 



o°^°o 


THE WHOLE SYSTEM IS A WHOLE SYSTEM 


THE METAPHYSIOLOGICAL CIRCUIT 

Wheels within wheels within ‘•wheels... 

Dr. Sarfatti's computers within computers within computers... 
Consciousness or information perceived as coherent Intelligence 
expanding to infinity in all directions. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 


PROMETHEUS RISING 


We are extending ourselves in Space and Time not because of cap- 
italism or socialism but in spite oft hem. The Right/Left Capitalist/ 
Socialist establishments are psychologically unprepared for our 
emerging situation in Time and Space. 

— F.M. Esfandiary, Upwingers 



271 




According to Patanjali, there are seven "limbs" to yoga, or as we 
would say seven steps or stages. 

First is asana, which consists of holding a single posture 
(usually sitting) for prolonged periods of time. This is an 
attempt, in our terminology, to stabilize the bio-survival circuit 
by drowning it in monotony. You sit, and sit, and sit, and sit. 
Eventually, an "internal peace" is reached, which signifies the 
atrophying of all background levels of "unconscious" or unno- 
ticed bio-survival anxiety. 

In other schools, since asana is so monotonous and slow- 
working and because war (second-circuit mammalian struggles 
over territory) so common among domesticated primates, an 
alternative method of stabilizing the bio-survival circuit is used: 
martial arts. Akido, judo, karate etc. all emerged from yoga-like 
mystic schools, as bio-survival reprogrammers. 

The second step in classical yoga, according to Patanjali, is 
pranayama. We have already commented on the efficiency of 
this breathing technique in quieting and mellowing-out second- 
circuit emotional programs. 

(It will already be seen that yoga, like brainwashing, begins 
from the bottom up, working on the more primitive and older 
circuits first.) 

The third step in yoga is dharana or mantra. Dharana con- 
sists of concentrating on a single image, such as a vividly imag- 
ined red triangle, and ruthlessly pushing aside any other images, 
verbalizations or impressions that cross the mind's screen. In 
practice, this is beyond the powers of most students, so the 
majority ofyoga teachers substitute mantra, which is concentra- 
tion (by repetition) on a single sentence, usually nonsensical, 
such as "Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare 
Hare" or “AumTat Sat Aum” or whatever. 

Either practice, dharana or mantra, stops the third-circuit 
"internal monologue," if persisted in for long enough periods 
each day. 

The Western mystical equivalent is Cabala, the most compli- 
cated "Jewish joke" ever invented. Briefly, Cabala exhausts the 
third, semantic circuit by setting it to solve intractable numero- 
logical and verbal problems. The Far Eastern equivalent is the 
Zen Koan, which serves the same function in a less maniacally 
systematic way than Cabala, e.g., "What is the sound of one hand 


273 



2J4 


Prometheus Rising 


clapping?" Zen koans are always combined with zazen (sitting 
Zen), which combines the first-circuit-clearing asana with sec- 
ond-circuit-mellowing breath-counting (a weakerpranayama). 

When the student has acquired sufficient detachment from 
first-circuit anxieties, second-circuit emotions and third-circuit 
reality-maps, by way of asana, pranayama and dharana or 
mantra, Patanjali recommends the practice of yama. This 
includes, but is not limited to, celibacy. The ultimate of yama is 
to lose all interest in both the social and sexual aspects of the 
fourth circuit; to cease to care at all about family, tribal or soci- 
etal matters. This is accomplished by self-denial, which is easier 
for those skilled in asana, pranayama and dharana, but still 
requires intense determination. 

Some take a short-cut at this point, discovered after Patanjali 
or not known to him, by having themselves locked up in caves. 
Such isolation, as indicated earlier, helps vastly in bleaching out 
all four hominid circuits. 

An alternative, for those not attracted to either celibacy or 
becoming hermits, is Tantra, invented in northern India around 
the time of Patanjali. This simply transmutes the fourth circuit by 
ceremonial, physiological and “magick” (self-hypnotic) explo- 
sion of the (prolonged) sexual act into fifth-circuit neurosomatic 
rapture. 

For those following the orthodox path of Patanjali, the fifth 
circuit is imprinted by niyama, which signifies "super-control" or 
"no-control," being the paradoxical state of being spontaneous 
deliberately. You cannot be taught niyama; you can only learn it 
by personal experience. We hypothesize that the bio-energies 
have to discharge somewhere, and then when one has driven 
them out of the first circuit by asana, out of the second circuit by 
pranayama, out of the third circuit by dharana or mantra, and 
out of the fourth circuit by yama, they are driven explosively 
upward into fifth-circuit neurosomatic illumination. 

The sixth step in yoga, according to Patanjali, is dhyana, 
which means "meditation" only in the roughest way. Dhyana 
means actually union with the object on the mind's screen, i.e., 
realization of the total meaning of the proposition that mind and 
its contents are functionally identical, i.e., opening the meta- 
programming circuit. One can make dhyana on anything; yogis 



Prometheus Rising 


275 


talk of making dhyana on a tree or a dog, just as don Juan Matus, 
the Mexican shaman, talks of becoming one with a coyote or a 
star in the books of Castaneda. 

The seventh step in yoga is Samadhi, from sam, (union; 
cognate of Greek syn) and Adhis, the Lord (cognate, Hebrew 
Adonai, Greek Adonis). Here Patanjali and his successors are in 
violent dispute, some claiming there is only one Samadhi, others 
claiming two or three or many. Since this corresponds with the 
opening and imprinting of the neurogenetic circuit, we must opt 
for the opinion that there are many Samadhi, depending on 
which or how many of the Godly archetypes of the genetic 
archives are imprinted. Catholic mystics make Samadhi on the 
Virgin, Sufis on Allah, Aleister Crowley on Pan, etc.; and, above 
all this, the eighth circuit cosmic information network can also 
be imprinted, making union not just with all sentient beings and 
some emblematic archetype of the DNA master program, but 
with the inorganic universe as well. It was from this second order 
or meta-physiological Samadhi that Gandhi said, "God is in the 
rock, too — in the rock!" and pantheists of all sorts, in all tradi- 
tions, emphatically agree with Canadian psychiatrist, R.M. 
Bucke who said after his own Eighth-Circuit Samadhi that the 
universe "is not a dead machine but a living presence." 

This planet is, to put the matter baldly, populated and largely 
controlled by domesticated primates who are not in all respects 
reasonable men and women. Voltaire may have been exaggerat- 
ing when he said that to understand the mathematical meaning of 
infinity, consider the extent of human stupidity; but the situation 
is almost that bad. Millions have been murdered by stupid lead- 
ers or stupid mobs, for stupid reasons, in every century; and the 
bizarre (accidentally imprinted) reality-tunnels which make this 
possible continue to rule us and robotize us. 

Nor is stupidity the exclusive possession of one group or 
another; you do not need a "vocation" for it as you do for the 
priesthood. It seems to be a contagious socio-semantic distur- 
bance which afflicts all of us at one time or another. Notorious 
examples can be found in the lives of the great. As we have al- 
ready mentioned an exact measurement of the extent of stupidity 
among the learned is provided by the fact that every scientific 
revolution takes one generation. Elderly scientists hardly ever 



27 6 


Prometheus Rising 


accept a new theory, however good it is, and the revolution is 
only completed when a second generation, free of the old im- 
prints, with vulnerable neurons, imprints the new reality-map. 

But if science, the paradigm of rationality, is infested with 
enough stupidity to cause this general one-generation time-lag, 
what can we say of politics, economics and religion? Time-lags 
of thousands of years seem to be "normal" in these areas. Indeed, 
it was through contemplation of religious history that Voltaire 
was led to his conclusion that human stupidity approximates to 
the infinite. The study of politics is hardly more inspiring. Let us 
just summarize the matter by saying that stupidity has murdered 
and imprisoned more geniuses (and more ordinary people), 
burned more books, slaughtered more populations, and blocked 
progress more effectively than any other force in history. 

It may be no exaggeration to say that stupidity has killed more 
people than all the diseases known to medicine and psychiatry. 

Intelligence is the capacity to receive, decode and transmit 
information efficiently. Stupidity is blockage of this process at 
any point. Bigotry, ideologies etc. block the ability to receive; 
robotic reality-tunnels block the ability to decode or integrate 
new signals; censorship blocks transmission. 

If intelligence could be increased, obviously solutions could 
be found more quickly to the various Doomsday scenarios 
threatening us. 

If each scientist working on the energy-resources problem 
could double or triple his or her intelligence, work that would 
require 20 years might be done in six. 

If human stupidity in general decreased, there would be less 
opposition to original thinking and new approaches to our old 
problems, less censorship and less bigotry. 

If stupidity decreased, less money would be wasted on vast 
organized imbecilities such as the Arms Race, and more would 
be available for life enhancing projects. 

There is nothing rationally desirable that cannot be achieved 
sooner if rationality itself increases. This is virtually a tautology, 
but we must consider the corollary: 

Work to achieve Intelligence Intensification is work to achieve 
all our other sane and worthwhile goals. 



Prometheus Rising 


111 


Maurice Nicholl, physician, psychiatrist, student of Jung, 
Gurdjieff and Esoteric Christianity, wrote that "the only purpose 
in work on consciousness is to decrease the amount of violence 
in the world." This is Public Health Problem Number One in the 
nuclear age, the age of overkill. 

We are not talking about mere increase in linear IQ — third- 
circuit semantic cleverness. We are talking of also the kinds of 
right-brain intelligence that Nicholl acquired from Jungian 
neurogenetic research and Gurdjieff’s meta-programming tech- 
niques. We are talking of, say, Beethoven's intelligence, which 
so disturbed Lenin, who could not bear to listen to the Appas- 
sionato (Sonata 23) because it made him "want to weep and pat 
people on the head, and we mustn't pat them on the head, we 
must hit them on the head, hit them hard, and make them obey." 
More of Beethoven's intelligence is needed, desperately, to 
create a signal that the current Lenins cannot ignore, that will 
make them weep, and stop hitting heads. 

We need more mentations, less munitions. The second-circuit 
mammalian political games are a million years obsolete. 

Dr. Nathan Kline has predicted that soon we will have drugs 
to improve memory, drugs to erase unpleasant memories, drugs 
to increase or decrease any emotion, drugs to prolong or shorten 
childhood, etc. It takes no great imagination to foresee that such 
chemicals will allow us greater control over our neural tunnel- 
realities than ever before. Obviously, people will use and abuse 
these potions in many ways, but the most intelligent will use 
them in the most intelligent way, namely to increase and intensify 
their intelligence in every direction possible on our spectrum of 
eight circuits. Chiefly, they will use them to increase neuro- 
logical freedom, to debug and reprogram obsolete reality-maps, 
to generally expand consciousness and sensitivity to signals and 
information. 

The potential for a neurological revolution — planetary Intelli- 
gence Intensification — should be quite clear to anyone who has 
even a slight knowledge of so primitive a psychedelic as LSD. 
One of the least known facts about the LSD research in the 
1960s was that the longest single research project with LSD, at 
Spring Grove Hospital, Maryland, showed an average 10% 
increase in linear IQ alone as well as the meta-programming 



Prometheus Rising 


278 

vistas and neurogenetic awakenings popularized by the outlaw 
LSD culture and its gurus. 

And there is a direct feedback loop between neuro-pharma- 
cology and other brain sciences. As William Burroughs says, 
"Anything that can be done chemically can be done by other 
means." Yoga plus bio-feedback produces detachment from old 
imprints quicker than yoga alone; hypnotism and mind-drugs 
produce synergistically more than either produces without the 
other; John Lilly has duplicated LSD effects in his isolation 
tanks; etc. 

It is commonplace for alarmists to warn us that the full 
armory of synergistically interacting neurosciences now evolving 
will allow unscrupulous tyrants to brainwash us more totally than 
ever before. 

We need to realize that the same technology, wisely used by 
intelligent men and women, can free us from every form of 
neurotic and irrational rigidity, to dial and focus our nervous 
systems as easily as we dial or focus our TV, turning any channel 
or circuit off and on as we choose. This is what meta-program- 
ming (cybernetic) consciousness means. 

Why be depressed when you can be happy, dumb when you 
can be smart, agitated when you can be tranquil? Obviously, 
most people are depressed, dumb and agitated most of the time 
because they lack the tools to repair and correct damaged, defec- 
tive circuits in their nervous system. We are acquiring the tools, 
and this Intelligence Intensification has the Pleasure Principle to 
fuel it. That is, the more internal freedom you achieve, the more 
you want. It is more fun to be happy than sad, more enjoyable to 
choose your emotions than to have them inflicted upon you by 
mechanical glandular processes, more pleasurable to solve your 
problems than to be stuck with them forever. 

In brief, Intelligence Intensification means intelligence-study- 
ing-intelligence (I 2 ), and the first thing discovered by intelli- 
gence-studying-intelligence (the brain studying the brain: meta- 
programming) is that the more types of intelligence you have, the 
more fun it is to try to develop even more subtle, sensitive, 
futique levels of awareness; higher intelligence still. 

In summary, Intelligence Intensification is desirable, because 
there is not a single problem confronting humanity that is not 



Prometheus Rising 


219 


either caused or considerably worsened by the prevailing stupid- 
ity (insensitivity) of the species: badly wired robots bumping into 
and maiming and killing each other. 

Intelligence Intensification is attainable, because modern 
advances in neuroscience are showing us how to alter any 
imprinted, conditioned or learned reflex that previously restricted 
us. 

Intelligence Intensification is hedonic, because the more free- 
dom and consciousness you achieve, the more you want; the less 
willing you are to slip back to dumb, blind, mechanistic circuits. 

Intelligence Intensification can accelerate our progress toward 
abolition of war and poverty; find cures for cancer and schizo- 
phrenia; achieve space migration and life extension (giving us 
space enough and time enough to achieve even more cosmic 
levels of awareness); or accomplish any other worthwhile goals. 

Like death and poverty, stupidity has been around so long that 
people cannot imagine human life without it, but it is rapidly 
becoming obsolete. However many special interest groups (intel- 
ligence agencies so-called, advertisers, tyrants, clergy, etc.) may 
profit from stupidity, humanity as a whole will profit more for its 
abolition. 

Approximately 50% of the human race has not evolved fully 
into the third circuit yet. That is, although they can exchange 
primitive signals and handle primitive artifacts, they are still 
mostly operating on the mammalian emotional circuit and the 
pre-mammalian bio-survival circuit. 

Newt Gingrich is their current leader in the United States. 
Third-circuit types cannot understand this and regard it as sinis- 
ter, but it is simple mammalian herd-behavior. Gingrich is the 
typical primate leader; the noises he makes, which appear 
meaningless to the third circuit Rationalist, are urgently mean- 
ingful to the territorial-emotional-patriotic minds of the majority 
of primates. 

Another 20% are "responsible, intelligent adults” with fully 
developed third and fourth circuits. They spend most of their 
time worrying, because the predominantly primate parameters of 
human society seem absurd, immoral and increasingly dangerous 
to them. 



280 


Prometheus Rising 


Another 20% are neurosomatic adepts. Fourth-circuit Moral- 
ists denounce them as "mystics," "space cases," "nuts," "the Me 
generation," "irresponsible hedonists," etc. 

Most of the fifth-circuit adepts (aquarian conspirators) have 
learned Joyce's arts of "silence, exile, cunning": they are invisi- 
ble. Others have turned their talents to "faith-healing" or various 
occult gimmicks of that sort, and very carefully do not tell their 
clients that the local ideology, morality and reality-tunnel is what 
made them ill in the first place. They give "good energy" and 
sensibly avoid conflict with the moral ideological "authorities." 

Another 5% have neurogenetic consciousness, and function as 
Evolutionary Agents- — servants of the Life Force, in Shaw's 
terminology. Their "God" is Pan (life), and their goal is immor- 
tality. 

Another 3% have mastered the meta-programming circuit and 
make up what Gurdjieff called "the Conscious Circle of human- 
ity." They are Free Masons, in the original meaning of that 
debased term: co-creators of future realities. 

Only 2% are neuro-quantum adepts and beyond space-time 
categories entirely. 

All these estimates are approximations. 

The newer circuits (neurosomatic bliss, neurogenetic “Atman” 
consciousness, meta-programming reality-games, non-local 
"cosmic" awareness) must have some function. 

We can only assume they are preparing us for our new situa- 
tion in space-time, after Space colonization, after longevity and 
immortality, after the Acceleration Factor accelerates even faster. 

Engineers rate an engine in revolutions-per-second. Looking 
at human history in terms of this metaphor we clearly see that: 

In the Old Stone Age, the acceleration factor was just slowly 
beginning to operate. We could estimate change then in, perhaps, 
revolutions per 10,000 years. 

With the neolithic revolution and urbanization soon after, the 
pace began to pick up. We can speak from that point on in terms 
of revolutions-per-millennium. 

After Galileo, revolutions-per-century became the normal rate 
of change. 

In this century we have moved into revolutions-per-genera- 
tion. 



Prometheus Rising 


28l 


We are now obviously moving into an acceleration of revolu- 
tions-per-decade. 

By the time the Consciousness Revolution peaks, the 
Longevity Pill is widely available, cloning is normal and all the 
ideas in the book, including the most wild and radical ones, seem 
quaint and old-fashioned — i.e., about 2005 — we will probably be 
growing accustomed to thinking in terms of revolution s-per-year. 

There is no reason to accept the tunnel-reality of this book as 
final. If you really understand the message, you will invent a 
bigger and better Future than I have suggested. As Barbara Marx 
Hubbard says: 


THE FUTURE EXISTS 
FIRST IN IMAGINATION, 
THEN IN WILL, 
THEN IN REALITY 
