The Satanic Bible 

Anton Szandor LaVey 




Called "The Black Pope" by many of his followers, Anton LaVey began the road to High 
Priesthood of the Church of Satan when he was only 16 years old and an organ player in a carnival: 

"On Saturday night I would see men lusting after half -naked girls dancing at the carnival, and 
on Sunday morning when I was playing the organ for tent- show evangelists at the other end of the 
carnival lot, I would see these same men sitting in the pews with their wives and children, asking 
God to forgive them and purge them of carnal desires. And the next Saturday night they'd be back 
at the carnival or some other place of indulgence. 

"I knew then that the Christian Church thrives on hypocrisy, and that man 's carnal nature will 
out!" 



From that time early in his life his path was clear. Finally, on the last night of April, 1966- 
Walpurgisnacht, the most important festival of the believers in witchcraft-La Vey shaved his head 
in the tradition of ancient executioners and announced the formation of The Church Of Satan. He 
had seen the need for a church that would recapture man's body and his carnal desires as objects of 
celebration. "Since worship of fleshly things produces pleasure," he said, "there would then be a 
temple of glorious indulgence. . ." 



The Satanic Bible 
Anton Szandor LaVey 



For Diane 



To: Bernadino Logara, who knew the value of money 
Karl Haushofer, a teacher without a classroom 
Rasputin, who knew the magic of a child 
Sir Basil Zaharoff, a gentleman 
Cagliostro, a rogue 

Barnabas Saul, the link with Mount Lalesh 
Ragnar Redbeard, whose might is right 
William Mortensen, who looked . . . and saw 
Hans Brick, who knows the law 
Max Reinhardt, a builder of dreams 
Orrin Klapp, the walking man 
Fritz Lang, who made moving blueprints 
Friedrich Nietzsche, a realist 

William Claude Dukinfield, who saved me a journey to Tibet 
Phineas Taylor Barnum, another great guru 
Hans Poelzig, who knew all the angles 
Reginald Marsh, a great artist 

Wilhelm Reich, who knew more than cabinet-making 
Mark Twain, a very brave man 

And to: Howard Hughes, James Moody, Marcello Truzzi, Adrian-Claude Frazier, Marilyn 

Monroe, Wesley Mather, William Lindsay Gresham, Hugo Zacchini, Jayne Mansfield, 
Frederick Goerner, C.Huntley, Nathaniel West, Horatio Alger, Robert Ervin Howard, 
George Orwell, Howard Phillips Lovecraft, Tuesday Weld, H.G. Wells, Sister Marie 
Koven, Harry Houdini, Togare, and the Nine Unknown Men. 



INTRODUCTION I (1969-1972) by Burton H. Wolfe 
INTRODUCTION II (1972-1976) by Michael A. Aquino 
INTRODUCTION III (1976-2005) by Burton H. Wolfe 
INTRODUCTION IV (2005-) by Peter H. Gilmore 
PREFACE 
PROLOGUE 

THE NINE SATANIC STATEMENTS 

(FIRE) 
-BOOK OF SATAN- 
The Infernal Diatribe 



(AIR) 

-BOOK OF LUCIFER- 
The Enlightenment 

I Wanted!: God - Dead or Alive 

II The God You SAVE May Be Yourself 

III Some Evidence of a New Satanic Age 

IV Hell, the Devil, and How to Sell Your Soul 

V Love and Hate 

VI Satanic Sex 

VII Not all Vampires Suck Blood 

VIII Indulgence... NOT Compulsion 

IX On the Choice of a Human Sacrifice 

X Life After Death Through Fulfillment of the Ego 

XI Religious Holidays 

XII The Black Mass 



(EARTH) 
-BOOK OF BEL1AL- 
The Mastery of the Earth 

I Theory and Practice of Satanic Magic: (Definition and Purpose of Lesser and 
Greater Magic) 

II The Three Types of Satanic Ritual 

III The Ritual, or "Intellectual Decompression," Chamber 

IV The Ingredients Used in the Performance of Satanic Magic: 

A. Desire 

B. Timing 

C. Imagery 

D. Direction 

E. The Balance Factor 

V The Satanic Ritual: 

A. Some Notes Which are to be Observed Before Beginning Ritual 

B. The Thirteen Steps 

C. Devices Used in Satanic Ritual 



(WATER) 
-BOOK OF LEVIATHAN- 
The Raging Sea 

I Invocation to Satan 

II The Infernal Names 

III Invocation Employed Towards the Conjuration of Lust 

IV Invocation Employed Towards the Conjuration of Destruction 

V Invocation Employed Towards the Conjuration of Compassion 

VI The Enochian Keys and The Enochian Language (The nineteen Keys will be 
listed here in chronological order) 



Underground Edition Extras 



The Satanic Bible 



INTRODUCTION by Burton H. Wolfe 



This is the original introduction, used in the 1969 first edition through 1972 

INTRODUCTION 
by Burton H. Wolfe* 

In the summer of 1966, a few newspapers in the San Francisco Bay Area began to take notice of 
a body of Devil- worshippers headed by a former circus and carnival lion handler and organist, 
Anton Szandor LaVey. Their practice of the black arts was nothing new in the world. It had traces 
in voodoo cults, a Hell-Fire Club that existed in 18th-Century England, a Satanic circle led by 
Aleister Crowley in England a century later, and the Black Order of Germany in the 1920' s and 
1930's. But two aspects of the San Francisco group made them different from their predecessors: 
they were blasphemously organized into a church, the First Church of Satan, instead of the usual 
coven Satanism and witchcraft lore; and they carried on their black magic openly instead of 
underground. 

Wedding, baptism, and funeral ceremonies dedicated to the Devil were held in the Church of 
Satan, with the press invited. Rituals in the tradition of the black arts were staged at midnight in the 
old dark Victorian house of LaVey, an incongruous building among all the white and yellow stucco 
houses in the San Francisco neighborhood a short way from the cliffs along the Golden Gate. 
Occasionally the roar of a full-grown lion that lived in the black house with the LaVey family 
(Anton, 39; wife Diane, 26; and daughters Karla, 17, and Zeena, 6) reverberated through the night, 
spooking the neighbors, who were already upset about living so close to Hell. 

Somehow it was all terribly provocative. Besides, the Devil has always made "good copy," as 
they say on the city desk. By 1967, the newspapers that were sending reporters to write about the 
Church of Satan extended from San Francisco across the Pacific to Tokyo and across the Atlantic to 
Paris. When a wedding or funeral was held, with a naked woman serving as altar to Satan, the 
Associated Press and other wire Services were on hand to transmit the story and the scandalous 
photographs to thousands of periodicals. Groups affiliated with the Church of Satan were organized 
in other parts of America and in England, France, Germany, Africa, and Australia. In existence less 
than a year, the Church of Satan had already proved one of its cardinal messages: the Devil is alive 
highly popular with a great many people. 

Anton LaVey, called "The Black Pope" by some of his followers, realized that two decades ago 
when he was playing organ for carnival sideshows. "On Saturday night," he recalls, "I would see 
men lusting after half-naked girls dancing at the carnival, and on Sunday morning when I was 
playing the organ for tent-show evangelists at the other end of the carnival lot, I would see these 
same men sitting in the pews with their wives and children, asking God to forgive them and purge 
them of carnal desires. And the next Saturday night they'd be back at the carnival or some other 
place of indulgence. I knew then that the Christian church thrives on hypocrisy, and that man's 
carnal nature will out no matter how much it is purged or scourged by any white light religion." 

Although LaVey did not realize it then — he was only eighteen — he was on his way toward 
formulating a religion that would serve as the antithesis to Christianity and its Judaic heritage. It 
was an old religion, older than Christianity or Judaism. But it had never been formalized, arranged 
into a body of thought and ritual. That was to be LaVey' s role in 20 th -Century civilization. 

All of LaVey' s background seemed to prepare him for that role. He is the descendant of 
Georgian, Roumanian, and Alsatian grandparents, including a gypsy grandma who passed on to 
him the legends of vampires and witches in her native Transylvania. As early as the age of five, 
LaVey was delving into Weird-Tales magazines, and books such as Mary Shelley's Frankenstein 
and Bram Stoker' s Dracula. He felt different from other children, and yet he became a ringleader, 
glorying in the organization of mock military orders. 



* Author of The Hippies and the forthcoming book, The Satanists. An article by Wolfe called "The Church That Worships Satan," 
the first complete study of the modern Satanic Church, appeared in the September 1968 issue of Knight magazine (Vol. 6, No. 8). 
Publishers Service, Inc., the producer of Knight, has graciously permitted portions of the article to appear in this introduction. 



In 1942, when he was twelve years old, LaVey's fascination with toy soldiers branched off to 
concern about the world war. He delved into military manuals and discovered that arsenals for the 
equipment of armies and navies could be bought like groceries in a supermarket and used to 
conquer masses of people. The idea took shape in his head that contrary to what the Bible said, the 
earth would not be inherited by the meek, but by the strong and mighty. 

After entering High School, LaVey became something of an offbeat child prodigy. He did most 
of his studying outside the school, delving into music, metaphysics, and secrets of the occult. At 
sixteen he became second oboist in the San Francisco Ballet Symphony Orchestra. Bored with high 
school classes, he dropped out in his junior year, left home, and joined the Clyde Beatty Circus as a 
cage boy, watering and feeding the lions and tigers. Animal trainer Beatty noticed that LaVey was 
comfortable working with the big cats and made him an assistant trainer. 

One day the circus calliope player became drunk. LaVey had taught himself to play the piano 
by ear and thought he could handle the organ keyboard well enough to provide some music for the 
performance that evening. It turned out that he played better and knew more music than the regular 
player, so Beatty kept him on the calliope. He accompanied the "Human Cannonball," Hugo 
Zachinni, and the Wallendas' high wire acts, among others. 

When he was eighteen, LaVey left the circus and joined a carnival. He became assistant to a 
magician, learned hypnosis, and studied more about the occult. This was a curious combination. On 
the one side, he was working in an atmosphere of life at its rawest level — of earthy music; the smell 
of wild animals; acts in which a second of missed timing meant accident; performances that 
demanded youth and strength, and shed those who grew old like last year's clothes; a world of 
physical excitement that had magical attractions. On the other side, he was working with the magic 
in the dark side of the human mind. 

After he married, LaVey abandoned the wondrous world of the carnival to settle into a career 
better suited for a home life. He enrolled as a criminology major at the City College of San 
Francisco. That led to his first conformist job — photographer for the San Francisco Police 
Department. As it worked out, that job had as much to do as any other with leading him toward 
Satanism. 

"I saw the bloodiest, grimiest side of human nature," he recalls. "People shot by nuts, knifed by 
friends, little kids splattered in the gutter by hit and run drivers. It was disgusting and depressing. I 
asked myself: 'Where is God?' I came to detest the sanctimonious attitude of people toward 
violence, always saying it's God's will." 

He quit in disgust after three years and went back to playing the organ, this time in nightclubs, 
to earn a living while he continued his studies into his life's fascination: the black arts. Once a week 
he held classes in ritual magic at his home. They attracted many who were, or have since become 
well known in the arts and sciences and business world. Eventually a "Magic Circle" evolved from 
this group. 

The major purpose of the Circle was to meet for the performance of black rituals that LaVey 
had discovered. He had accumulated a library of works that described the Black Mass and other 
pagan ceremonies conducted by groups such as the Knights Templar in 14th-Century France and 
the Golden Dawn in 19th-century England. The original intent of these black orders was to 
blaspheme, mock the Christian church, and address themselves to the Devil as an anthropomorphic 
deity that represented the reverse of God. In LaVey's view, the Devil was much more than that. 
Satan represented a dark, hidden force in nature that was responsible for the workings of earthly 
affairs for which science and religion had no explanation and no control. 

"At first I detected this force in small ways," LaVey explains. "It might be the discovery of an 
individual whose powers of wishing were so great that he could win horse races. In my case, I 
found I could conjure up parking places at the last minute in front of theaters, when none should 
have been there. I also discovered an ability through magic to bring reversals to enemies and gain 
advantage for myself. I realized I had stumbled onto something, and I would have gone on doing it 
on my own without any Magic Circle. But I also realized that for some things private magic was 
weaker than mass ritual magic." 

Hence, on the last night of April 1966 — Walpurgisnacht, the most important festival in the lore 
of magic and witchcraft — LaVey shaved his head in the tradition of ancient strongmen and 



announced the formation of the Church of Satan. For proper identification as its minister, he put on 
the clerical collar. Up to that collar, he almost looked holy. But the Genghis Khan shaved head, his 
Mephistophelian beard, and his narrow eyes gave him the necessary demonic look for his 
priesthood of the Devil's church. 

"For one thing," LaVey explains, "calling it a church enabled me to follow the magic formula 
of nine parts outrage to one part social respectability that is needed for success. But the main 
purpose was to gather a group of like-minded individuals together for the use of their combined 
energies in calling up the dark force in nature that is called Satan." 

As LaVey correctly perceived, all other churches are based on worship of the spirit and denial 
of the flesh. He saw the need for a church that would recapture man's body and carnal desires as 
objects of celebration. "And," he adds, "since worship of fleshly things produces pleasure, there 
would then be a temple of glorious indulgence that would be fun for people. All the other churches 
are places of abstinence with services that people want to have over as soon as possible so they can 
get out and start enjoying life again." 

In the Church of Satan, LaVey initiated clever psychodramas that would enable a group of 
flesh-worshippers to overcome the repressions and inhibitions fostered by the Judaeo-Christian 
tradition. He knew that the old concept of a Black Mass to satirize Christian services was 
outmoded. There was a revolution in the Christian church itself against orthodox rites and 
traditions. It was popular to declare that "God is dead." So, the rites that he worked out, while still 
maintaining the trappings of the ancient Black Mass, were changed from a negative mockery to 
positive forms of celebrations: Satanic weddings, funerals devoid of sanctimonious platitudes, lust 
rituals to help individuals attain their sex desires, destruction rituals to enable members of the 
Satanic Church to triumph over enemies and win their goals in life. 

There is no altruism or love-thy-neighbor concept in the Satanic religion, except in the sense of 
helping other adherents of the Black Path to gain their desires by group energy. Satanism is a 
blatantly selfish, brutal religion. It is based on the belief that man is inherently a selfish, violent 
creature, that life is a Darwinian struggle for survival of the fittest, that the earth will be ruled by 
those who fight to win the ceaseless competition that exists in all jungles — including that of urban 
societies. On that score, the Church of Satan may be justly criticized, although even its critics will 
have to admit that its philosophy is based on logic and real conditions that exist in the world. 

On the other hand, the great contribution to civilized thought made by the Church of Satan is its 
celebration of the complete human being instead of the spirit alone. The signs are everywhere that 
humanity is striving to burst the restrictive bonds of religion. It was predicted in the Bible, for that 
matter, in symbolic passages that dealt with Satan chained for a thousand years, after which he 
would break free and foment deviltry on the earth. Now it is happening. Sex is exploding in movies 
and literature, on the streets, and in the home. People are dancing topless and bottomless. Youths 
are throwing off restrictions that deny pleasure in mind and body. There is a ceaseless quest for 
entertainment, gourmet foods and wines, adventure, enjoyment of the here and now. Man is no 
longer willing to wait for any afterlife that promises to reward the clean, pure — translate: ascetic, 
drab — spirit. There is a mood of neo-paganism and hedonism, and from it have emerged a wide 
variety of intelligent individuals — doctors, lawyers, engineers, teachers, writers, actors, 
stockbrokers, clerks, printers, nurses (to cite just a few categories of Satanic Church members) — 
who are interested in carrying the liberation of the flesh all the way to a formal religion. 

In the Satanic Bible, Anton LaVey explains the philosophy of Satanism better than any of his 
ancestors in the Kingdom of Darkness, and describes the various rituals and trappings that have 
been devised to create a true church of flesh-worshippers. It is clear, from the interest in Satanism 
that erupted in 1968 along with the fascination directed toward Ira Levin's book Rosemary's Baby, 
that there are many people who would like to know how to start Satanic cults and ritualize black 
magic. This book shows them how to go about it and fills that need. It is also clear that there is a 
place for the formulation of teachings that constitute the antithesis to the repressive, inhibiting, anti- 
material dogma of Christianity and other antiquated religions. The Satanic Bible also fills that need. 

Perhaps the most important social value of this book is its challenge to other religions: Deal 
with carnal desire and the flesh in a logical, rational manner or lose the struggle not only for men's 
bodies, but also their souls. 



INTRODUCTION by Michael A. Aquino 



This introduction appeared in the hardcover Satanic Bible from its first release in 1972 
throughout its existence, and in the Avon paperback edition from 1972 to 1976 

Each successive era of man's cultural and ethical development has upraised its literary 
manifesto - an argument challenging existing norms and proposing a novel approach to the 
enduring issues of civilization. It has not infrequently been the case that the realities of political 
nationalism have been blended with the idealisms of extranational emphasis to produce what we 
now cautiously term existentialism. Pertinent works might include the Republic of Plato, the 
Politics of Aristotle, Machiavelli's Prince, and the writings of Nietzsche, Hobbes, Locke, Marx, 
and Sartre. 

This is the book of our era. 

The dawn of the Satanic Age was celebrated on April 30, 1966 - the Year One. On that date 
Anton Szandor LaVey consecrated the Church of Satan in the city of San Francisco and assumed 
office as its first High Priest. What had begun several years earlier as an intellectual forum 
dedicated to the investigation and application of the Black Arts has since expanded into an 
international philosophical movement of the first magnitude. Satanism, once the isolate province of 
furtive outcasts and radical eccentrics, has now become a serious alternative to the doctrines of 
theism and materialism. In its championship of indulgence instead of abstinence, the Church of 
Satan rejects the notion that man's progress is contingent upon his acceptance of a self-imposed 
morality. Sound judgment derives from the comparison and resolution of opposites, Satanists 
maintain, and one cannot presume to justice by honoring a single standard of behavior. 

An empirical approach to morality is not a recent innovation; such theorists as Pythagoras, 
Hegel, Spencer, and Compte advanced the original propositions for man's intellectual 
independence from the natural order. And, though this concept has invariably provoked adverse 
reaction from society-oriented institutions, it is not an insubstantial viewpoint. One need only 
consider the spasmodic cataclysms of history to see how inadequately Homo sapiens cooperates 
with his fellows. 

By itself, however, all theory is inconsequential. Until now the only advocates of a subjective 
morality were professorial abstractionists and -occasionally -the scattered and disorganized 
devotees of the traditional "White" witchcraft. Indeed the latter have enjoyed some notoriety of 
late, as their supposed proclamation of a liberal morality tempered by social correctness appeals to 
the bored but timid dilettante. Such aficionados of the occult profess a righteous horror of Black 
Magic or Satanism, which they denounce as a maleficent, degenerate creature of moral and carnal 
abuse. 

The Satanist, on the other hand, regards traditional witchcraft as merely a neurotic reaction 
against the established religions of the parent culture. The worship of any deity or deities - under 
any guise whatsoever - is repulsive to the Black Magician, who considers all protestations of faith 
or trust in a supernatural protectorate to be humiliating demonstrations of cowardice and emotional 
insecurity. Satanism has been frequently misrepresented as "devil worship", when in fact it 
constitutes a clear rejection of all forms of worship as a desirable component of the personality. It is 
not so much an anti-religion - a simple rebuttal of any one belief - as it is an un-religion, an 
uncompromising dismissal of all insubstantial mysticism. As such it represents a far more serious 
threat to organized theologies than do the archaic customs of the old daemonologies. 

Ritual and fantasy play a very real part in the activities of the Satanic Church, on the 
assumption that the experience and control of mental and metaphysical irrationality are necessary 
for the strengthening of the psyche. Thus a distinct effort is made to avoid what was perhaps the 
Achilles' heel of the Gurdjieff-Ouspensky school of subjective psychological evolution; earlier 
disciples of self-determined transcendentalism postulated that all non-materialistic sensations were 
a danger to the coherence of the student. Crucial to the concept of Satanic ritual is an appreciation 
of its illustrative and inspirational qualities without necessarily regarding it as inflexible reality. 

Satanism is more accurately identified as a disposition than as a religion, as it is actively 
concerned with all the facets of human existence, not with only the so-called spiritual aspects. Yet 



those who proclaim it to be a danger to justice and cooperative order have missed the point entirely. 
Satanism advocates unrestricted freedom, but only to the extent that one's preferences do not 
impinge upon another's. It should also be noted that Satanism is a philosophy of the individual, not 
of the mass. There are no collective policy statements save the famous Crowley admonition: "Self- 
deceit is the gravest of all 'sins'." 

While the majority of the populace may instinctively incline to a de facto Satanism, the Church 
cautions that its propositions are not for the irresponsible. There are no Satanic missionaries, and to 
affiliate one must meet exacting standards. Inexperience is not dishonored, but pretentiousness, 
hypocrisy, and pomposity are treated with the scorn that they deserve. Satanism is no less an art 
than it is a science, and there is "no standard of measurement deified". 

Dr. LaVey is uniquely prepared to author the new Diabolism. An American of Georgian, 
Alsatian, and Romanian Gypsy descent, he was quick to display the characteristic restlessness of 
his nomadic ancestors and an unusual empathy for their earthy, arcane lore. An early preoccupation 
with the military sciences led him to read the various logistical publications of the World War II 
era, only to discover that the proud visions of martial glory entertained in the first world war had 
given way to a detached, mercenary realism in the second. His experiences as a student did nothing 
to dispel this first taste of human cynicism, and LaVey's growing impatience with the sterile 
regimentation of conventional education drove him to seek the strange, surrealistic enchantments of 
the circus. He assisted Clyde Beatty as a wild-animal trainer, and he soon developed a strong 
affinity for the cats which was to mark his personality in a most curious manner. All animate 
creatures are basically bestial, he reasoned, and even the most refined social orders achieve at best 
only a flimsy suppression of this innate savagery. From the circus he proceeded to a carnival, where 
the glitter of the performing arts was tinged with the ever-present struggle for daily subsistence. 
Here LaVey worked in a pathetic but quietly dignified world of misfits, sideshow freaks, and 
human oddities; and here he was to learn the craft of the stage magician, whose success depends 
upon the contrived distraction of the audience's attention. With a certain grimness he noted the 
fascination with which the "normal" man regards his deformed comrades - a gloating satisfaction 
over the visiting of misfortune upon another instead of oneself. Becoming increasingly interested in 
this cruel, lycanthropic attribute of human nature, he studied criminology in college and eventually 
worked with the San Francisco Police Department as a photographer. 

As a circus professional he had seen carnal man at his most artistic; now he was to view him at 
his most vicious. Three years of the gore, brutality, and abject misery that permeate the criminal 
subculture left him sickened, disillusioned, and angered with the rampant hypocrisy of polite 
society. He turned to the pipe organ as a means of living and devoted the greater part of his efforts 
to what was to become his life's work - Black Magic. 

LaVey had long since rejected the stereotypical tracts on ceremonial sorcery as the hysterical 
products of medieval imaginations. The "Old Craft" with its superstitions, affected mannerisms, 
and infantile parlor games was not for him; what he sought was a metaphysical psychology that 
would approach the intellectual man only after giving due consideration to his brutal, animalistic 
origins. And so he came at last to the Goat of Mendes. 

Satan is easily the most enigmatic figure in classical literature. Possessed of every conceivable 
wealth, and the most powerful of the Archangels, he spurned his exalted allegiance to proclaim his 
independence from all that his Heavenly patron personified. Although condemned to the most 
hideous of domains, a Hell totally shunned by the divinity, he embraced such privations as the 
burden of his intellectual prerogative. In his Infernal Empire one might indulge even the most 
extraordinary tastes with impunity, yet amidst such wanton licentiousness the Devil maintained a 
peculiar nobility. It was this elusive quality which Anton LaVey determined to identify. 

After long years of research and experiment, he pronounced the guiding principle of Satanism: 
that the ultimate consequence of man lies not in unity but in duality. It is only synthesis that decides 
values; adherence to a single order is arbitrary and therefore insignificant. 

LaVey's disturbing theories and bizarre operations of ceremonial Black Magic eventually 
attracted a following of similarly minded individuals. From this first small circle the Church of 
Satan was to emerge, attuned to its founder's contention that its messages would be presented most 
effectively through "nine parts social respectability to one part of the most blatant outrage". 



The social impact and spectacular growth of the Church were to become something of a legend 
in themselves, but it was an essential part of LaVey's convictions that the formal institution's role 
was principally that of a catalyst. Contemporary civilization has proved too interdependent to 
permit the luxury of monastic isolationism. Satanism must accordingly assume a stance 
comprehensible to the average intellect. It was with such intent that the Satanic Bible was 
conceived. 

The Satanic Bible is a most insidious document. One is strongly tempted to compare it with that 
obscure, malefic mythology The King in Yellow, a psychopolitical work that supposedly drove its 
readers to madness and damnation. As candid and conversational as the Satanic Bible might seem 
at first glance, it is not a volume to be gently dismissed. It is very much the product of our time, not 
only because such a book -together with its author -would more than likely have been destroyed in 
an earlier era, but because its creation was an evolutionary inevitability. 

You, the reader, are about to be impaled upon the sharp horns of a Satanic dilemma. If you 
accept the propositions of this book, you condemn your most cherished sanctuaries to annihilation. 
In return you will awaken - but only to the most fiery of Hells. Should you reject the argument, you 
resign yourself to a cancerous disintegration of your previously subconscious sense of identity. 
Small wonder that the Archfiend's legacy has won him so many bitter enemies! 

Whatever your decision, it can be avoided no longer. The Satanic Bible finally articulates what 
man has instinctively dreaded to proclaim: that he himself is potentially divine. 



INTRODUCTION by Burton H. Wolfe 



This second introduction by Wolfe was used from 1976 through 2005 

On a winter's evening in 1967, 1 drove crosstown in San Francisco to hear Anton Szandor 
LaVey lecture at an open meeting of the Sexual Freedom League. I was attracted by newspaper 
articles describing him as "the Black Pope" of a Satanic church in which baptism, wedding, and 
funeral ceremonies were dedicated to the Devil. I was a free-lance magazine writer, and I felt there 
might be a story in LaVey and his contemporary pagans; for the Devil has always made "good 
copy," as they say on the city desk. 

It was not the practice of the black arts itself that I considered to be the story, because that is 
nothing new in the world. There were Devil-worshipping sects and voodoo cults before there were 
Christians. In eighteenth-century England a Hell-Fire Club, with connections to the American 
colonies through Benjamin Franklin, gained some brief notoriety. During the early part of the 
twentieth century, the press publicized Aleister Crowley as the "wickedest man in the world." And 
there were hints in the 1920s and '30s of a "black order" in Germany. 

To this seemingly old story LaVey and his organization of contemporary Faustians offered two 
strikingly new chapters. First, they blasphemously represented themselves as a "church," a term 
previously confined to the branches of Christianity, instead of the traditional coven of Satanism and 
witchcraft lore. Second, they practiced their black magic openly instead of underground. 

Rather than arrange a preliminary interview with LaVey for discussion of his heretical 
innovations, my usual first step in research, I decided to watch and listen to him as an unidentified 
member of an audience. He was described in some newspapers as a former circus and carnival lion 
tamer and trickster now representing himself as the Devil's representative on earth, and I wanted to 
determine first whether he was a true Satanist, a prankster, or a quack. I had already met people in 
the limelight of the occult business; in fact, Jeane Dixon was my landlady and I had a chance to 
write about her before Ruth Montgomery did. But I had considered all the occultists phonies, 
hypocrites, or quacks, and I would never spend five minutes writing about their various forms of 
hocus-pocus. 

All the occultists I had met or heard of were white-lighters: alleged seers, prophesiers, and 
witches wrapping their supposedly mystic powers around God-based, spiritual communication. 
LaVey, seeming to laugh at them if not spit on them in contempt, emerged from between the lines 
of newspaper stories as a black magician basing his work on the dark side of nature and the carnal 
side of humanity. There seemed to be nothing spiritual about his "church". 

As I listened to LaVey talk that first time, I realized at once there was nothing to connect him 
with the occult business. He could not even be described as metaphysical. The brutally frank talk he 
delivered was pragmatic, relativistic, and above all rational. It was unorthodox, to be sure: a blast at 
established religious worship, repression of humanity's carnal nature, phony pretense at piety in the 
course of an existence based on dog-eat-dog material pursuits. It was also full of sardonic satire on 
human folly. But most important of all, the talk was logical. It was not quack magic that LaVey 
offered his audience. It was common sense philosophy based on the realities of life. 

After I became convinced of LaVey 's sincerity, I had to convince him that / intended to do 
some serious research instead of adding to the accumulation of hack articles dealing with the 
Church of Satan as a new type of freak show. I boned up on Satanism, discussed its history and 
rationale with LaVey, and attended some midnight rituals in the famous Victorian manse once used 
as Church of Satan headquarters. Out of all that I produced a serious article, only to find that was 
not what the publishers of "respectable" magazines wanted. They were interested in only the freak 
show kind of article. Finally, it was a so-called "girlie" or "man's" magazine, Knight of September 
1968, that published the first definitive article on LaVey, the Church of Satan, and LaVey' s 
synthesis of the old Devil legends and black magic lore into the modern philosophy and practice of 
Satanism that all followers and imitators now use as their model, their guide, and even their Bible. 

My magazine article was the beginning, not the end (as it has been with my other writing 
subjects), of a long and intimate association. Out of it came my biography of LaVey, The Devil's 
Avenger, published by Pyramid in 1974. After the book was published, I became a card-carrying 
member and, subsequently, a priest of the Church of Satan, a title I now proudly share with many 



celebrated persons. The postmidnight philosophical discussions I began with LaVey in 1967 
continue today, a decade later, supplemented sometimes these days by a nifty witch or some of our 
own music, him on organ and me on drums, in a bizarre cabaret populated by superrealistic 
humanoids of LaVey's creation. 

All of LaVey's background seemed to prepare him for his role. He is the descendant of 
Georgian, Roumanian, and Alsatian grandparents, including a gypsy grandmother who passed on to 
him the legends of vampires and witches in her native Transylvania. As early as the age of five, 
LaVey was reading Weird-Tales magazines and books such as Mary Shelly' s Frankenstein and 
Bram Stoker's Dracula. Though he was different from other children, they appointed him as leader 
in marches and maneuvers in mock military orders. 

In 1942, when LaVey was twelve, his fascination with toy soldiers led to concern over World 
War II. He delved into military manuals and discovered arsenals for the equipment of armies and 
navies could be bought like groceries in a supermarket and used to conquer nations. The idea took 
shape in his head that contrary to what the Christian Bible said, the earth would not be inherited by 
the meek, but by the mighty. 

In high school LaVey became something of an offbeat child prodigy. Reserving his most 
serious studies for outside the school, he delved into music, metaphysics, and secrets of the occult. 
At fifteen, he became second oboist in the San Francisco Ballet Symphony Orchestra. Bored with 
high school classes, LaVey dropped out in his Junior year, left home, and joined the Clyde Beatty 
Circus as a cage boy, watering and feeding the lions and tigers. Animal trainer Beatty noticed that 
LaVey was comfortable working with the big cats and made him an assistant trainer. 

Possessed since childhood by a passion for the arts, for culture, LaVey was not content merely 
with the excitement of training jungle beasts and working with them in the ring as a fill-in for 
Beatty. By age ten he had taught himself to play the piano by ear. This came in handy when the 
circus calliope player became drunk before a performance and was unable to go on; LaVey 
volunteered to replace him, confident he could handle the unfamiliar organ keyboard well enough 
to provide the necessary background music. It turned out he knew more music and played better 
than the regular calliopist, so Beatty cashiered the drunk and installed LaVey at the instrument. He 
accompanied the "Human Cannonball", Hugo Zachinni, and the Wallendas' high-wire acts, among 
others. 

When LaVey was eighteen he left the circus and joined a carnival. There he became assistant to 
a magician, learned hypnosis, and studied more about the occult. It was a curious combination. On 
the one side he was working in an atmosphere of life at its rawest level - of earthy music; the smell 
of wild animals and sawdust; acts in which a second of missed timing meant accident or death; 
performances that demanded youth and strength, and shed those who grew old like last year's 
clothes; a world of physical excitement that had magical attractions. On the other side, he was 
working with magic in the dark side of the human brain. Perhaps the strange combination 
influenced the way he began to view humanity as he played organ for carnival sideshows. 

"On Saturday night," LaVey recalled in one of our long talks, "I would see men lusting after 
half-naked girls dancing at the carnival, and on Sunday morning when I was playing organ for tent- 
show evangelists at the other end of the carnival lot, I would see these same men sitting in the pews 
with their wives and children, asking God to forgive them and purge them of carnal desires. And 
the next Saturday night they'd be back at the carnival or some other place of indulgence. I knew 
then that the Christian church thrives on hypocrisy, and that man's carnal nature will out no matter 
how much it is purged or scourged by any white-light religion." 

Though LaVey did not realize it then, he was on his way toward formulating a religion that 
would serve as the antithesis of Christianity and its Judaic heritage. It was an old religion, older 
than Christianity or Judaism. But it had never been formalized, arranged into a body of thought and 
ritual. That was to become LaVey's role in twentieth-century civilization. 

After LaVey became a married man himself in 1951, at age twenty-one, he abandoned the 
wondrous world of the carnival to settle into a career better suited for homemaking. He had been 
enrolled as a criminology major at the City College of San Francisco. That led to his first 
conformist job, photographer for the San Francisco Police Department. As it worked out, that job 
had as much to do as any other with his development of Satanism as a way of life. 

"I saw the bloodiest, grimiest side of human nature," LaVey recounted in a session dealing with 



his past life. "People shot by nuts, knifed by their friends; little kids splattered in the gutter by hit- 
and-run drivers. It was disgusting and depressing. I asked myself: 'Where is God?' I came to detest 
the sanctimonious attitude of people toward violence, always saying 'it's God's will'." 

So he quit in disgust after three years of being a crime photographer and returned to playing 
organ, this time in nightclubs and theaters to earn a living while he continued his studies into his 
life's passion: the black arts. Once a week he held classes on arcane topics: hauntings, E.S.P., 
dreams, vampires, werewolves, divination, ceremonial magic, etc. They attracted many people who 
were, or have since become, well known in the arts and sciences, and the business world. 
Eventually a "Magic Circle" evolved from this group. 

The major purpose of the Circle was to meet for the performance of magical rituals LaVey had 
discovered or devised. He had accumulated a library of works that described the Black Mass and 
other infamous ceremonies conducted by groups such as the Knights Templar in fourteenth-century 
France, the Hell-Fire club and the Golden Dawn in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century England. 
The intent of some of these secret orders was to blaspheme, lampoon the Christian church, and 
address themselves to the Devil as an anthropomorphic deity that represented the reverse of God. In 
LaVey's view, the Devil was not that, but rather a dark, hidden force in nature responsible for the 
workings of earthly affairs, a force for which neither science nor religion had any explanation. 
LaVey's Satan is "the spirit of progress, the inspirer of all great movements that contribute to the 
development of civilization and the advancement of mankind. He is the spirit of revolt that leads to 
freedom, the embodiment of all heresies that liberate." 

On the last night of April 1966-Walpurgisnacht, the most important festival in the lore of 
magic and witchcraft-La Vey ritualistically shaved his head in accordance with magical tradition 
and announced the formation of the Church of Satan. For proper identification as its minister, he 
put on the clerical collar. Up to that collar he looked almost holy. But his Genghis Khan-like 
shaven head, his Mephistophelian beard, and his narrow eyes gave him the necessary demonic look 
for his priesthood of the Devil's church on earth. 

"For one thing," LaVey explained himself, "calling it a church enabled me to follow the magic 
formula of one part outrage to nine parts social respectability that is needed for success. But the 
main purpose was to gather a group of like-minded individuals together for the use of their 
combined energies in calling up the dark force in nature that is called Satan." 

As LaVey pointed out, all other churches are based on worship of the spirit and denial of the 
flesh and the intellect. He saw the need for a church that would recapture man's mind and carnal 
desires as objects of celebration. Rational self-interest would be encouraged and a healthy ego 
championed. 

He began to realize that the old concept of a Black Mass to satirize Christian services was 
outmoded or, as he put it, "beating a dead horse". In the Church of Satan, LaVey initiated some 
exhilarating psychodramas, in lieu of Christianity's self-debasing services, thereby exorcising 
repressions and inhibitions fostered by white-light religions. 

There was a revolution in the Christian church itself against orthodox rites and traditions. It had 
become popular to declare that "God is dead". So, the alternative rites that LaVey worked out, 
while still maintaining some of the trappings of ancient ceremonies, were changed from a negative 
mockery to positive forms of celebrations and purges: Satanic weddings consecrating the joys of 
the flesh, funerals devoid of sanctimonious platitudes, lust rituals to help individuals attain their sex 
desires, destruction rituals to enable members of the Satanic church to triumph over enemies. 

On special occasions such as baptisms, weddings, and funerals in the name of the Devil, press 
coverage, though unsolicited, was phenomenal. By 1967 the newspapers that were sending 
reporters to write about the Church of Satan extended from San Francisco across the Pacific to 
Tokyo and across the Atlantic to Paris. A photo of a nude woman, half covered by a leopard skin, 
serving as an altar to Satan in a LaVey-conceived wedding ceremony, was transmitted by major 
wire services to daily newspapers everywhere: and it showed up on the front page of such bulwarks 
of the media as the Los Angeles Times. As the result of the publicity, grottos (LaVey's counterpart 
to covens) affiliated with the Church of Satan spread throughout the world, proving one of LaVey's 
cardinal messages: the Devil is alive and highly popular with a great many people. 

Of course LaVey pointed out to anyone who would listen that the Devil to him and his 
followers was not the stereotyped fellow cloaked in red garb, with horns, tail and pitchfork, but 



rather the dark forces in nature that human beings are just beginning to fathom. How did LaVey 
square that explanation with his own appearance at times in black cowl with horns? He replied: 
"People need ritual, with symbols such as those you find in baseball games or church services or 
wars, as vehicles for expending emotions they can't release or even understand on their own." 
Nevertheless, LaVey himself soon tired of the games. 

There were setbacks. First, some of LaVey 's neighbors began complaining about the full-grown 
lion he was keeping as a house pet, and eventually the big cat was donated to the local zoo. Next, 
one of LaVey 's most devoted witches, Jayne Mansfield, died under a curse he had placed on the 
head of her suitor, lawyer Sam Brody, for a variety of reasons I have explained in The Devil's 
Avenger; LaVey had persistently warned her away from Brody and felt depressed over her death. It 
was the second tragic death in the sixties of a Hollywood sex symbol with whom he had been 
intimately involved; the other was Marilyn Monroe, LaVey' s paramour for a brief but crucial 
period in 1948 when he had quit the carnival and was playing organ for strippers around the Los 
Angeles area. 

On top of all that, LaVey was tired of organizing entertainments and purges for his church 
members. He had gotten in touch with the last living remnants of the prewar occult fraternities of 
Europe, was busily acquiring their philosophies and secret rituals left over from the pre-Hitler era, 
and needed time to study, write and work out new principles. He had long been experimenting with 
and applying the principles of geometric spatial concepts in what he terms "The Law of the 
Trapezoid". (He scoffs at current faddists who are "barking up the wrong pyramids".) He was also 
becoming widely sought as speaker, guest on radio and television programs, and production and/or 
technical adviser to scores of television producers and moviemakers turning out Satanic chillers. 
Sometimes he was also an actor. As sociologist Clinton R. Sanders points out: "...no occultist has 
had as direct an impact upon formulaic cinematic presentations of Satanism as has Anton Szandor 
LaVey. Ritual and esoteric symbolism are central elements in LaVey 's church and the films in 
which he has had a hand contain detailed portrayals of Satanic rites and are filled with traditional 
occult symbols. The emphasis upon ritual in the Church of Satan is 'intended to focus the emotional 
powers within each individual'. Similarly, the ornate ritualism that is central to LaVey' s films may 
reasonably be seen as a mechanism to involve and focus the emotional experience of the cinema 
audience." 

At last LaVey decided to transfer rituals and other organized activities to Church of Satan 
grottos around the world, and devote himself to writing, lecturing, teaching - and to his family: wife 
Diane, the blonde beauty who serves as High Priestess of the Church; raven-haired daughter Karla, 
now in her early twenties, a criminology major like her father before, spending much of her time 
lecturing on Satanism at universities in many parts of the country; and finally Zeena, remembered 
by people who saw the famous photo of the Satanic Church baptism as a tiny tot, but now a 
gorgeously developed teenager attracting a growing pack of wolves, human male variety. 

Out of LaVey' s relatively quiescent period came his widely read, pioneering books: First, The 
Satanic Bible, which at this writing is in its twelfth edition (and this is my second, revised 
introduction, after having written the original introduction to the first edition). Second, The Satanic 
Rituals, which covers more of the somber, complex material LaVey unearthed from his increasing 
sources. And third, The Compleat Witch, a bestseller in Italy, but, sadly, allowed by its American 
publisher to go out of print with its potential unfulfilled. 

LaVey 's spreading out from organized church activities to writing books for worldwide 
distribution has, of course, greatly expanded Church of Satan membership. Satanism' s growing 
popularity has naturally been accompanied by scare stories from religious groups complaining that 
The Satanic Bible now outsells the Christian Bible on college campuses and is a leading causative 
factor in youngsters' turning away from God. And certainly one suspects that Pope Paul had LaVey 
in mind when he issued his worldwide proclamation two years ago that the Devil is "alive" and "a 
person", a living, fire-breathing character spreading evil over the earth. LaVey, maintaining that 
"evil" is "live" spelled backward and should be indulged in and enjoyed, answers the pope and the 
religious scare groups this way: 

"People, organizations, nations are making millions of dollars off us. What would they do 
without us? Without the Church of Satan, they wouldn't have anybody to rage at and to take the 
blame for all the rotten things happening in the world. If they really feel this way, they shouldn't 



have blown us out of proportion. What you really have to believe instead is that they are the 
charlatans, and they're really glad to have us around so they can exploit us. We're an extremely 
valuable commodity. We've helped business, lifted up the economy, and some of the millions of 
dollars we have generated have in turn flowed into the Christian church. We have proved many 
times over the Ninth Satanic Statement that says the church - and countless individuals - cannot 
exist without the Devil." 

For that the Christian church must pay a price. The events that LaVey predicted in the first 
edition of The Satanic Bible have come to pass. Repressed people have burst their bonds. Sex has 
exploded, the collective libido has been released, in movies and literature, on the streets, and in the 
home. People are dancing topless and bottomless. Nuns have thrown off their traditional habits, 
exposed their legs, and danced the "Missa Solemnis Rock" that LaVey thought he was conjuring up 
as a prank. There is a ceaseless universal quest for entertainment, gourmet foods and wines, 
adventure, enjoyment of the here and now. Humanity is no longer willing to wait for any afterlife 
that promises to reward the clean, pure - translate: ascetic, drab - spirit. There is a mood of 
neopaganism and hedonism, and from it there have emerged a wide variety of brilliant individuals - 
doctors, lawyers, engineers, teachers, writers, stockbrokers, real estate developers, actors and 
actresses, mass communications media people (to cite a few categories of Satanists) - who are 
interested in formalizing and perpetuating this all-pervading religion and way of life. 

It is not an easy religion to adopt in a society ruled so long by Puritan ethics. There is no false 
altruism or mandatory love-thy-neighbor concept in this religion. Satanism is a blatantly selfish, 
brutal philosophy. It is based on the belief that human beings are inherently selfish, violent 
creatures, that life is a Darwinian struggle for survival of the fittest, that only the strong survive and 
the earth will be ruled by those who fight to win the ceaseless competition that exists in all jungles - 
including those of urbanized society. Abhor this brutal outlook if you will; it is based, as it has been 
for centuries, on real conditions that exist in the world we inhabit rather than the mystical lands of 
milk and honey depicted in the Christian Bible. 

In The Satanic Bible, Anton LaVey has explained the philosophy of Satanism more profoundly 
than any of his ancestors in the Kingdom of Darkness, while describing in detail the innovative 
rituals and trappings he has devised to create a church of realists. It has been clear from the first 
edition that many people want to read this book to learn how to start Satanic groups and ritualize 
black magic. The Satanic Bible and The Satanic Rituals are the only books that have demonstrated, 
in a way that is authentic and true to relevant traditions, how all of that can be done. There have 
been many imitators, never attributing their source, and with good reason; because once the 
shabbiness and shallowness of the imitators have been compared to LaVey' s pioneering work, there 
can no longer be any market for the ripoff artists. 

The evidence is clear to any who are willing to view the record: Anton LaVey brought Satan 
out of the closet and the Church of Satan is the fountainhead of contemporary Satanism. This book 
summarizes the message both convey, and remains both challenge and inspiration, as timely today 
as when it was written. 

San Francisco 

December 25, 1976 (XI Anno Satanas) 



INTRODUCTION by Peter H. Gilmore 



This introduction was used starting in 2005 

Opening the Adamantine Gates 
An Introduction to The Satanic Bible 
by Magus Peter H. Gilmore 

This book has the potential to change your life - it did mine. It is a diabolical work, written with 
elegance, earthiness, and might, serving quite magically as a mirror. If you look within these pages 
and see yourself; if you find its principles to be those you've lived by as long as you can remember; 
if you feel the evocation of an overwhelming sense of homecoming, then you will have discovered 
that you are a part of a scattered "meta-tribe," and the proper name for what you are is "Satanist." 

I first encountered Anton Szandor LaVey through The Satanic Bible, at the age of thirteen when 
I was an avowed atheist. Not being partial to literature promoting faith of any sort, I was pleasantly 
surprised that this was no rant by someone claiming direct contact with Satan. 

Instead, I found a common sense, rational, materialist philosophy, along with theatrical ritual 
techniques meant as self-transformative psychodrama. Here was a tool perfectly suited to my nature 
as a means for getting the most out of my life. I knew that "atheist" was no longer sufficient as a 
designation for myself. This book lead me to meet and befriend LaVey, working with him to 
administer the Church he created, and finally to succeed him as the second High Priest of the 
Church of Satan. 

It is one of Anton LaVey 's numerous talents that his written words are vivid, brimming with his 
distinct personality. His well-wrought phrases give the sense of encountering the man himself, and 
such an impression is not a delusion. When my wife, Peggy Nadramia, and I met The Doctor" (an 
affectionate moniker used by those close him), we agreed that here was exactly the man we had 
dared to expect from reading his books. 

Unlike the founders of other religions who claimed 'inspiration" delivered through some 
supernatural entity, LaVey readily acknowledged that he used his own faculties to synthesize 
Satanism. He based it on both his understanding of the human animal acquired from life experience 
and the wisdom he'd gained from other advocates of materialism, pragmatism, and individualism. 
His blasphemously named "Church of Satan" was consciously designed to be an adversary to 
existing "spiritual' belief systems. It was the first organization promulgating religious philosophy 
championing Satan as the symbol of liberty and individualism. Concerning his role as founder he 
said that, "If he didn't do it himself, someone else, per haps less qualified, would have." His 
perceptive insights thus lead him to give a proper name to a human type that has always been part 
of our species. 

LaVey was born in Chicago in 1930, and his parents soon relocated to California, that 
westernmost gathering place for the brightest and darkest manifestations of that "American 
Dream." It was a fertile environment for the sensitive child who would eventually mature into a 
role the press would dub "The Black Pope." From his Eastern European grandmother, young 
LaVey learned of the superstitions that are still extant in that part of the world. These tales whetted 
his appetite for the outre, leading him to become absorbed in classic dark literature such as Dracula 
and Frankenstein. He also became an avid reader of the pulp magazines, which first published tales 
now deemed classics of the horror and science fiction genres. He later befriended seminal Weird 
Tales authors such as Clark Ashton Smith, Robert Barbour Johnson, and George Has. His fancy 
was captured by fictional characters found in the works of Jack London and Somerset Maugham, in 
comic strip characters like Ming the Merciless, as well as by historical figures of a diabolical cast 
such as Cagliostro, Rasputin, and Basil Zaharoff. More interesting to him than the available occult 
literature, which he dismissed as being little more than sanctimonious white magic, were books 
applied obscure knowledge such as Dr. William Wesley Cook's Practical Lessons in Hypnotism, 
Jane's Fighting Ships, and manuals for handwriting analysis. 

His musical abilities were noticed early, and he was given free reign by his parents to try his 
hand at various instruments. LaVey was mainly attracted to the keyboards because of their scope 



and versatility. He found time to practice and could easily reproduce songs heard by ear without 
recourse to fake books or sheet music. This talent would prove to be one of his main sources of 
income for many years, particularly his calliope playing during his carnival days, and later his 
many stints as an organist in bars, lounges, and nightclubs. These venues gave him the chance to 
study how various melodic lines and chord progressions swayed the emotions of his audiences, 
from the spectators at the carnival and spook shows to the individuals seeking solace for the 
disappointments in their lives in distilled spirits and the smoke-filled taverns for which LaVey's 
playing provided a moody soundtrack. 

His odd interests marked him as an outsider, and he did not alleviate this by feeling any 
compulsion to be "one of the boys." He despised gym class and team sports and often cut classes to 
follow his own interests. Moving beyond the standard school texts, he absorbed volumes analyzing 
human behavior on every level, from the impulses of the individual to the dynamics of the herd. He 
watched films that would later be labeled film noir as well as German expressionist cinema such as 
M, The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari, and the Dr. Mabuse movies. His taste for flashy apparel also 
served to amplify his alienation from the mainstream. 

He dropped out of high school to hang around with hoodlum types and gravitated towards 
working in the circus and carnivals, first as a roustabout and cage boy and later as a musician. His 
always-active curiosity was rewarded as he "learned the ropes" from the carnies. He worked an act 
with the big cats-he had an affinity for these powerful predators-and later assisted with the 
machinations of the spook shows. He became well-versed in the many rackets used to separate the 
rubes from their money, along with the psychology that lead people to such pursuits. Under the 
name "The Great Szandor" he played calliope and organ for the bawdy shows on Saturday nights, 
as well as for tent revivalists on Sunday mornings, seeing many of the same men attending both and 
noting this telling contradiction. All of these activities provided a firm, earthy background for his 
evolving cynical worldview. 

When the carnival season ended, LaVey would earn money by playing organ in Los Angeles 
area burlesque houses, and he relates that it was during this period that he met and had a brief affair 
with a then-unknown Marilyn Monroe, after accompanying her "chain-dragging" striptease at the 
Mayan Burlesque Theater. Moving back to San Francisco, LaVey worked for a while as a 
photographer for the police department, and, during the Korean War, enrolled in San Francisco City 
College as a criminology major to avoid the draft. Both his studies and occupation revealed grim 
insights into human nature and confirmed his rejection of spiritual doctrines. At this time he met 
and married Carole Lansing, who bore him his first daughter Karla Maritza, in 1952. A few years 
earlier LaVey had examined the writings of Aleister Crowley, so in 1951 he decided to meet some 
of the Berkeley Thelemites. He was unimpressed, as they were more mystical and less "wicked" 
than he supposed they should be for disciples of Crowley's libertine creed. 

During the 1950s, LaVey supplemented his income as an investigator of alleged supernatural 
phenomena, handing "nut calls" referred to him by friends in the police department. These 
experiences proved to him that many people were inclined to seek a bizarre, "otherworldly" 
explanation for phenomena that had prosaic causes. His rational explanations often disappointed the 
complainants, so LaVey invented exotic sources to make them feel better, giving him insight as to 
how belief functions in people's lives. 

In 1956 he purchased a Victorian house on California Street in San Francisco's Richmond 
District. It was reputed to have been a speakeasy, and was tricked out with secret passages, possibly 
to aid in clandestine carnal activities. He painted it black, thus creating a haunted intrusion on an 
otherwise typical block, matching his own unique presence. It was only natural that it would later 
become home to the Church of Satan. After his death, the building remained unoccupied, a 
brooding "shunned house," until it was demolished on October 17 of 2001 by the real estate 
company that owned the property. 

LaVey met and became entranced by Diane Hegarty in 1959; he then left Carole in 1960. 
Hegarty and LaVey never married, but she bore him his second daughter, Zeena Galatea in 1964 
and was his companion for many years. Hegarty and LaVey later separated; she sued him for 
palimony and this was settled out of court. 

Through his "ghost busting," and his frequent public gigs as an organist, including playing the 
Wurlitzer at the Lost Weekend cocktail lounge, LaVey became a local celebrity and his holiday 



parties attracted many San Francisco notables. Guests included Carin de Plessin, called "the 
Baroness" as she had grown up in the royal palace of Denmark, anthropologist Michael Harner, 
Chester A. Arthur III (grandson to the U.S. President), Forrest J. Ackerman (later, the publisher of 
Famous Monsters of Filmland and acknowledged expert on science fiction), author Fritz Leiber, 
local eccentric Dr. Cecil E. Nixon (creator of the musical automaton Isis), and underground 
filmmaker Kenneth Anger. From this crowd LaVey distilled what he called a "Magic Circle" of 
associates who shared his interest in the bizarre, the hidden side of what moves the world. As his 
expertise grew, LaVey began presenting Friday night lectures summarizing the fruits of his 
research. In 1965, LaVey was featured on the "The Brother Buzz Show", a humorous children's 
program hosted by marionettes. The focus was on LaVey' s "Addams Family" lifestyle — making a 
living as a hypnotist, investigator of the paranormal, and organist, as well as on his highly unusual 
pet Togare, a Nubian lion. 

In the process of creating his lectures, LaVey noticed many common threads, which he then 
began weaving into a tenebrous conceptual tapestry. When a member of his Magic Circle suggested 
that he had the basis for a new religion LaVey agreed and decided to found the Church of Satan as 
the best means for communicating his ideas. And so, in 1966 on the night of May Eve — the 
traditional Witches' Sabbath — LaVey declared the founding of the Church of Satan and 
renumbered 1966 as the year One, Anno Satanas — the first year of the Age of Satan. 

The attention of the press soon followed, particularly with the wedding of Radical journalist 
John Raymond to New York socialite Judith Case on February 1st, 1967. Famed photographer Joe 
Rosenthal was sent by the San Francisco Chronicle to capture an image that went onward to the 
pages of the Los Angeles Times and other prominent newspapers. LaVey began the mass 
dissemination of his Philosophy via the release of a record album, The Satanic Mass 
(Murgenstrumm, 1968). The album featured a cover graphic named by LaVey as the "Sigil of 
Baphomet": the goat head in a pentagram, circled with the Hebrew word "Leviathan," which has 
since become the ubiquitous symbol of Satanism. Featured on the album was part of the rite of 
baptism written for three-year-old Zeena (performed on May 23rd, 1967). In addition to the actual 
recording of a Satanic ritual, side two of the LP had LaVey reading excerpts from the as-yet- 
unpublished The Satanic Bible over music by Beethoven, Wagner, and Sousa. His Friday lectures 
continued and he instituted a series of "Witches' Workshops" to instruct women in the art of 
attaining their will through glamour, feminine wiles, and the skillful discovery and exploitation of 
men's fetishes. 

By the end of 1969, LaVey had taken monographs he had written to explain the philosophy and 
ritual practices of the Church of Satan and expanded them. His influences included philosophers 
such as Ayn Rand, Nietzsche, and Mencken, the base wisdom of the carnival folk, the observations 
of P.T. Barnum, and finally the imagery of the archfiend found in Twain, Milton, Byron, and other 
romantics. He prefaced these essays and rites with reworked excerpts from Ragnar Redbeard's 
Might is Right and concluded it with "Satanized" versions of John Dee's Enochian Keys to create 
The Satanic Bible. It has never gone out of print and remains the main source for the contemporary 
Satanic movement. 

The philosophy presented in it is an integrated whole, not a smorgasbord from which one can 
pick and choose. It is meant only for a select few who are epicurean, pragmatic, worldly, atheistic, 
fiercely individualistic, materialistic, rational, and darkly poetic. There may be fellow-travelers — 
atheists, misanthropes, humanists, freethinkers — who see only a partial reflection of themselves in 
this showstone. Satanism may thus attract these types in some ways, but ultimately it is not for 
them. If it was only a philosophy, such individualists might be welcome; it is more. Satanism 
moves into the realm of religion by having an aesthetic component, a system of symbolism, 
metaphor, and ritual in which Satan is embraced not as some Devil to be worshipped, but as a 
symbolic external projection of the highest potential of each individual Satanist. The identification 
Satanists have with Satan is an intentional barrier against those who cannot resonate with this 
sinister archetype. The Satanic Bible was followed in 1971 by The Compleat Witch (re-released in 
1989 as The Satanic Witch), a manual that teaches "Lesser Magic" — the ways and means of reading 
and manipulating people and their actions toward the fulfillment of one's desired goals. The Satanic 
Rituals (1972) was printed as a companion volume to The Satanic Bible and contains "Greater 
Magic" rituals culled from a Satanic tradition identified by LaVey in various world cultures. Two 



collections of essays, which range from the humorous and insightful to the gleefully sordid, The 
Devil's Notebook (1992) and Satan Speaks (1998), complete his written canon. 

Since its founding, LaVey's Church of Satan attracted many varied people who shared an 
alienation from conventional religions, including celebrities Jayne Mansfield and Sammy Davis Jr., 
as well as rock stars King Diamond, Marilyn Manson, and Marc Almond who all became, at least 
for a time, card-carrying members. He numbered among his associates Robert Fuest, director of the 
Vincent Price "Dr. Phibes" films as well as The Devil's Rain; Jacques Vallee, ufologist and 
computer scientist, who was used as the basis for the character Lacombe, played by Francois 
Truffaut, in Spielberg's Close Encounters of the Third Kind; and Aime Michel known as a 
spelunker and publisher of Morning of the Magicians. 

LaVey's influence spread through articles in the news media throughout the world, popular 
magazines such as Look, McCalls, Argosy, Newsweek, Time, and later Seconds, The Nose, and 
Rolling Stone, numerous men's magazines, and via talk shows such as Joe Pyne, Phil Donahue, and 
Johnny Carson. This publicity left a mark on novels like Rosemary's Baby (completed by Ira Levin 
during the early days of the Church's high profile media blitz) and Leiber's Our Lady of Darkness, 
and films such as Rosemary's Baby (1968), The Devil's Rain (1975), The Car (1977), Dr. Dracula 
(1980), and many of the "Devil Cult" films from the 1970s through today that picked up on 
symbolism from LaVey's writings. A feature length documentary, Satanis: The Devil's Mass 
(1969) covered the rituals and philosophy of the Church, while LaVey himself was profiled in Nick 
Bougas' 1993 video documentary Speak of the Devil. 

The Doctor's musicianship is preserved on several recordings, primarily Strange Music (1994) 
and Satan Takes a Holiday (1995). These reflect his penchant for tunes from the 1930s through the 
1950s, which range from humorous to doom-laden as well as devil-themed songs. LaVey renders 
them on a series of self-programmed synthesizers, imitating various instrumental groups. They are 
impressive, as these are not multi-track recordings, but are done in one take with the sounds of the 
full instrumental ensemble created through the simultaneous use of numerous synthesizers played 
by LaVey's dexterous fingers as well as his feet on an organ- style foot pedal keyboard hooked-up 
via midi. 

While his relationship with Diane Hegarty crumbled in the late 70s, a new lady would enter his 
life to become his final companion. Blanche Barton became his helpmate, co-conspirator, High 
Priestess, lover, and best friend. She bore him his only son, Satan Xerxes Carnacki LaVey on 
November 1, 1993. As his health deteriorated in the mid-90s, LaVey preferred to spend time only 
with the people whom he found enriching, gaining him a reputation as a recluse. He died on 
October 29, 1997, of complications arising from heart disease. There was no deathbed repentance. 
He went proudly as he lived, as a Satanist, his only regrets being that he was leaving the great party 
that was life, and that he would miss seeing his young son Xerxes grow to manhood. 

According to LaVey's wishes, Barton succeeded him as the head of the Church after his death. 
In 2001, she passed on this position to myself, Peter H. Gilmore, by then a longtime church 
administrator and member of the Council of Nine. In 2002, Magistra Barton exchanged her position 
as High Priestess with my wife Magistra Peggy Nadramia, another veteran administrator who was 
serving as chair of the Council of Nine. 

Two biographies have been written about LaVey: The Devil's Avenger (1974) by Burton Wolfe 
and Secret Life of a Satanist (1990) by Blanche Barton. In recent years detractors of LaVey with 
rather obvious agendas have disputed the authenticity of some of the events chronicled in these 
books. They accuse him of fabrication and self -promotional exaggeration. LaVey was a skilled 
showman, a talent he never denied. However, the incidents detailed in both biographies that can be 
authenticated via photographic, testimonial, and documentary evidence far outweigh the items in 
dispute. The fact remains that LaVey pursued a course that exposed him to unusual individuals 
from all strata of society. It climaxed with his founding of the Church of Satan, which lead to 
international notoriety. He was gifted beyond what is normally considered a standard for 
excellence, turning his hand to many arts with a deftness usually gained through dedication to only 
one muse. He lived his life as a true exemplar of all that he extolled — pursuing his pleasures 
without stinting while producing works only attained through vigorous self-discipline. 

LaVey succeeded in avoiding the fate of Mrs. Cassan, a character from Charles G. Finney's The 
Circus of Dr. Lao, a favored novel of The Doctor. Her doom was to die and be forgotten, for her 



life produced nothing that was memorable in either a creative or destructive manner. With his 
thoughts, now presented in multiple languages, continuing to inspire like minds around the globe, 
Anton Szandor LaVey has won a place in the arena of philosophical and religious discourse. We 
Satanists owe him our gratitude for symbolically opening the adamantine gates of Hell, by giving 
form and structure to a philosophy that names us as the Gods of our own subjective universes. His 
ultimate heresy against the complacent masses was to reject their idolized dictum that all men are 
equal. Consequently he challenged his comrades to exercise their faculties to judge and be judged 
in all that they do. He dethroned the seeking of external saviors and championed responsibility for 
all of one's actions and the resultant consequences. That is perhaps the most frightening principle to 
a society wherein none are held accountable for their behavior. 

The Church of Satan remains a world-spanning cabal of those who work to continue human 
society's momentum along the vector set by LaVey. It shall remain the treasured domain of an 
imperious few, who live by their own blood and brains, who proudly reject any "good guy badge" 
and embrace the title of Satanist. There is nothing to fear in The Satanic Bible, for it will not 
transform you into something that you are not. It cannot convert you, or persuade you in directions 
not inherent in your nature. Its power lies in its ability to show you what you are through your 
reaction to its contents. Embrace them, and your life shall gain a new focus, for you will have 
sharpened your understanding of your self, and you will see more clearly how you differ from those 
around you. Reject some or all of these hardnosed postulates, and you are free to move on towards 
whatever other spiritual or conceptual haven that provides you with satisfaction. However, you will 
no longer be ignorant of what it means to be a Satanist. If you've grasped these fundamentals and 
have the talent to read people, you might notice that there are such individuals about you, and like 
LaVey himself, that they are some of the most just and fascinating folks you'll have the pleasure of 
knowing. 

Magus Peter H. Gilmore 
High Priest, Church of Satan 



PREFACE 



This book was written because, with very few exceptions, every tract and paper, every 
"secret" grimoire, all the "great works" on the subject of magic, are nothing more than 
sanctimonious fraud - guilt- ridden ramblings and esoteric gibberish by chroniclers of magical 
lore unable or unwilling to present an objective view of the subject. Writer after writer, in 
efforts to state the principles of "white and black magic", has succeeded instead in clouding 
the entire issue so badly that the would-be student of sorcery winds up stupidly pushing a 
planchette over a Ouija board, standing inside a pentagram waiting for a demon to present 
itself, limply tossing I-Ching yarrow stalks like so many stale pretzels, shuffling pasteboards 
to foretell a future which has lost any meaning, attending seminars guaranteed to flatten his 
ego - while doing the same to his wallet - and in general making a blithering fool of himself in 
the eyes of those who know! 

The true magus knows that occult bookshelves abound with the brMe relics of frightened 
minds and sterile bodies, metaphysical journals of self-deceit, and constipated rule -books of 
Eastern mysticism. Far too long has the subject of Satanic magic and philosophy been written 
down by wild-eyed journalists of the right-hand path. 

The old literature is the by-product of brains festering with fear and defeat, written 
unknowingly for the assistance of those who really mle the earth, and who, from their Hellish 
thrones, laugh with noisome mirth. 

The flames of Hell bum brighter for the kindling supplied by these volumes of hoary 
misinformation and false prophecy. 

Herein you will find truth - and fantasy. Each is necessary for the other to exist; but each must 
be recognized for what it is. What you see may not always please you; but you will see! 

Here is Satanic thought from a truly Satanic point of view. 




The Church of Satan 

San Francisco, Walpurgisnacht 1968 



PROLOGUE 



The gods of the right-hand path have bickered and quarreled for an entire age of earth. Each 
of these deities and their respective priests and ministers have attempted to find wisdom in 
their own lies. The ice age of religious thought can last but a limited time in this great scheme 
of human existence. The gods of wisdom- defiled have had their saga, and their millerinium 
hath become as reality. Each, with his own "divine" path to paradise, hath accused the other of 
heresies and spiritual indiscretions. The Ring of the Nibelungen doth carry an everlasting 
curse, but only because those who seek it think in terms of "Good" and "Evil" - themselves 
being at all times "Good". The gods of the past have become as their own devils in order to 
live. Feebly, their ministers play the devil's game to fill their tabernacles and pay the 
mortgages on their temples. Alas, too long have they studied "righteousness", and poor and 
incompetent devils they make. So they all join hands in "brotherly" unity, and in their 
desperation go to Valhalla for their last great ecumenical council. "Draweth near in the gloom 
the twilight of the gods." The ravens of night have flown forth to summon Loki, who hath set 
Valhalla aflame with the searing trident of the Inferno. The twilight is done. A glow of new 
light is borne out of the night and Lucifer is risen, once more to proclaim: "This is the age of 
Satan! Satan Rules the Earth!" The gods of the unjust are dead. This is the morning of magic, 
and undefiled wisdom. The flesh prevaileth and a great Church shall be builded, consecrated 
in its name. No longer shall man's salvation be dependent on his self-denial. And it will be 
known that the world of the flesh and the living shall be the greatest preparation for any and 
all eternal delights! 

REGIE SATANAS! 
AVE SATANAS! 



HAIL SATAN! 



THE 
NINE 
SATANIC 
STATEMENTS 




1 . Satan represents indulgence, instead of abstinence! 

2. Satan represents vital existence, instead of spiritual pipe dreams! 

3. Satan represents undefiled wisdom, instead of hypocritical self-deceit! 

4. Satan represents kindness to those who deserve it, instead of love wasted on ingrates! 

5 . Satan represents vengeance, instead of turning the other cheek! 

6. Satan represents responsibility to the responsible, instead of concern for psychic 
vampires! 

7. Satan represents man as just another animal, sometimes better, more often worse than 
those that walk on all- fours, who, because of his "divine spiritual and intellectual 
development", has become the most vicious animal of all! 

8. Satan represents all of the so-called sins, as they all lead to physical, mental, or 
emotional gratification! 

9. Satan has been the best friend the church has ever had, as he has kept it in business all 
these years! 



(FIRE) 



THE BOOK OF SATAN 

THE INFERNAL DIATRIBE 

The first book of the Satanic Bible is not an attempt to blaspheme as much as it is a statement 
of what might be termed "diabolical indignation". The Devil has been attacked by the men of 
God relentlessly and without reservation. Never has there been an opportunity, short of 
fiction, for the Dark Prince to speak out in the same manner as the spokesmen of the Lord of 
the Righteous. The pulpit- pounders of the past have been free to define "good" and "evil" as 
they see fit, and have gladly smashed into oblivion any who disagree with their lies - both 
verbally and, at times, physically. Their talk of "charity", when applied to His Infernal 
Majesty, becomes an empty sham - and most unfairly, too, considering the obvious fact that 
without their Satanic foe their very religions would collapse. How sad, that the allegorical 
personage most responsible for the success of spiritual religions is shown the least amount of 
charity and the most consistent abuse - and by those who most unctuously preach the rules of 
fair play! For all the centuries of shouting- down the Devil has received, he has never shouted 
back at his detractors. He has remained the gentleman at all times, while those he supports 
rant and rave. He has shown himself to be a model of deportment, but now he feels it is time 
to shout back. He has decided it is finally time to receive his due. Now the ponderous rule- 
books of hypocrisy are no longer needed. In order to relearn the Law of the Jungle, a small, 
slim diatribe will do. Each verse is an inferno. Each word is a tongue of fire. The flames of 
Hell bum fierce . . . and purify! Read on and learn the Law. 



THE 
BOOK OF 

SATAN 

I 

1 . In this arid wilderness of steel and stone I raise up my voice that you may hear. To the 
East and to the West I beckon. To the North and to the South I show a sign 
proclaiming: Death to the weakling, wealth to the strong! 

2. Open your eyes that you may see, Oh men of mildewed minds, and listen to me ye 
bewildered millions! 

3. For I stand forth to challenge the wisdom of the world; to interrogate the "laws" of 
man and of "God"! 

4. I request reason for your golden rule and ask the why and wherefore of your ten 
commandments. 

5. Before none of your printed idols do I bend in acquiescence, and he who saith "thou 
shalt" to me is my mortal foe! 

6. I dip my forefinger in the watery blood of your impotent mad redeemer, and write 
over his thorn- torn brow: The true prince of evil - the king of slaves! 

7. No hoary falsehood shall be a truth to me; no stifling dogma shall encramp my pen! 

8. I break away from all conventions that do not lead to my earthly success and 
happiness. 

9. I raise up in stem invasion the standard of the strong! 

10. 1 gaze into the glassy eye of your fearsome Jehovah, and pluck him by the beard; I 

uplift a broad- axe, and split open his worm-eaten skull! 
1 1 . 1 blast out the ghastly contents of philosophically whited sepulchers and laugh with 

sardonic wrath! 



THE 
BOOK OF 

SATAN 

II 

1 . Behold the crucifix; what does it symbolize? Pallid incompetence hanging on a tree. 

2. I question all things. As I stand before the festering and varnished facades of your 
haughtiest moral dogmas, I write thereon in letters of blazing scorn: Lo and behold; all 
this is fraud! 

3. Gather around me, Oh! ye death- defiant, and the earth itself shall be thine, to have and 
to hold! 

4. Too long the dead hand has been permitted to sterilize living thought! 

5 . Too long right and wrong, good and evil have been inverted by false prophets ! 

6. No creed must be accepted upon authority of a "divine" nature. Religions must be put 
to the question. No moral dogma must be taken for granted - no standard of 
measurement deified. There is nothing inherently sacred about moral codes. Like the 
wooden idols of long ago, they are the work of human hands, and what man has made, 
man can destroy! 

7. He that is slow to believe anything and everything is of great understanding, for belief 
in one false principle is the begiririing of all unwisdom. 

8. The chief duty of every new age is to upraise new men to determine its liberties, to 
lead it towards material success - to rend the rusty padlocks and chains of dead custom 
that always prevent healthy expansion. Theories and ideas that may have meant life 
and hope and freedom for our ancestors may now mean destruction, slavery, and 
dishonor to us! 

9. As environments change, no human ideal standeth sure! 

10. Whenever, therefore, a he has built unto itself a throne, let it be assailed without pity 
and without regret, for under the domination of an inconvenient falsehood, no one can 
prosper. 

1 1 . Let established sophisms be dethroned, rooted out, burnt and destroyed, for they are a 
standing menace to all true nobility of thought and action! 

12. Whatever alleged "truth" is proven by results to be but an empty fiction, let it be 
unceremoniously flung into the outer darkness, among the dead gods, dead empires, 
dead philosophies, and other useless lumber and wreckage! 

13. The most dangerous of all enthroned lies is the holy, the sanctified, the privileged he - 
the he everyone believes to be a model truth. It is the fruitful mother of all other 
popular errors and delusions. It is a hydra-headed tree of unreason with a thousand 
roots. It is a social cancer! 

14. The he that is known to be a he is half eradicated, but the he that even intelligent 
persons accept as fact - the he that has been inculcated in a hide child at its mother's 
knee - is more dangerous to contend against than a creeping pestilence! 

15. Popular lies have ever been the most potent enemies of personal liberty. There is only 
one way to deal with them: Cut them out, to the very core, just as cancers. Exteiminate 
them root and branch. Aririihilate them, or they will us! 



THE 
BOOK OF 

SATAN 



III 

1. "Love one another" it has been said is the supreme law, but what power made it so? 
Upon what rational authority does the gospel of love rest? Why should I not hate mine 
enemies - if I "love" them does that not place me at their mercy? 

2. Is it natural for enemies to do good unto each other - and what is good? 

3 . Can the torn and bloody victim "love" the blood- splashed jaws that rend him limb 
from limb? 

4. Are we not all predatory animals by instinct? If humans ceased wholly from preying 
upon each other, could they continue to exist? 

5. Is not "lust and carnal desire" a more truthful term to describe "love" when applied to 
the continuance of the race? Is not the "love" of the fawning scriptures simply a 
euphemism for sexual activity, or was the "great teacher" a glorifier of eunuchs? 

6. Love your enemies and do good to them that hate and use you - is this not the 
despicable philosophy of the spaniel that rolls upon its back when kicked? 

7. Hate your enemies with a whole heart, and if a man smite you on one cheek, smash him 
on the other!; smite him hip and thigh, for self-preservation is the highest law! 

8 . He who turns the other cheek is a cowardly dog ! 

9. Give blow for blow, scorn for scorn, doom for doom - with compound interest 
liberally added thereunto! Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, aye four- fold, a hundred- fold! 
Make yourself a Terror to your adversary, and when he goeth his way, he will possess 
much additional wisdom to ruminate over. Thus shall you make yourself respected in 
all the walks of life, and your spirit - your immortal spirit - shall live, not in an 
intangible paradise, but in the brains and sinews of those whose respect you have 
gained. 



THE 
BOOK OF 

SATAN 



IV 

1 . Life is the great indulgence - death, the great abstinence. Therefore, make the most of 

life - HERE AND NOW ! 

2. There is no heaven of glory bright, and no hell where sinners roast. Here and now is 
our day of torment! Here and now is our day of joy! Here and now is our opportunity! 
Choose ye this day, this hour, for no redeemer liveth! 

3. Say unto thine own heart, "I am mine own redeemer." 

4. Stop the way of them that would persecute you. Let those who devise thine undoing be 
hurled back to confusion and infamy. Let them be as chaff before the cyclone and after 
they have fallen rejoice in thine own salvation. 

5. Then all thy bones shall say pridefully, "Who is like unto me? Have I not been too 
strong for mine adversaries? Have I not delivered myself by mine own brain and 



THE 
BOOK OF 

SATAN 



V 

1 . Blessed are the strong, for they shall possess the earth - Cursed are the weak, for they 
shall inherit the yoke! 

2. Blessed are the powerful, for they shall be reverenced among men - Cursed are the 
feeble, for they shall be blotted out! 

3. Blessed are the bold, for they shall be masters of the world - Cursed are the 
righteously humble, for they shall be trodden under cloven hoofs! 

4. Blessed are the victorious, for victory is the basis of right - Cursed are the vanquished, 
for they shall be vassals forever! 

5. Blessed are the iron-handed, for the unfit shall flee before them - Cursed are the poor 
in spirit, for they shall be spat upon! 

6. Blessed are the death- defiant, for their days shall be long in the land - Cursed are the 
gazers toward a richer life beyond the grave, for they shall perish amidst plenty! 

7. Blessed are the destroyers of false hope, for they are the true Messiahs - Cursed are the 
god- adorers, for they shall be shorn sheep! 

8. Blessed are the valiant, for they shall obtain great treasure - Cursed are the believers in 
good and evil, for they are frightened by shadows! 

9. Blessed are those that believe in what is best for them, for never shall their minds be 
terrorized - Cursed are the "lambs of God", for they shall be bled whiter than snow! 

10. Blessed is the man who has a sprinkling of enemies, for they shall make him a hero - 
Cursed is he who doeth good unto others who sneer upon him in return, for he shall be 
despised! 

1 1 . Blessed are the mighty- minded, for they shall ride the whirlwinds - Cursed are they 
who teach lies for truth and truth for lies, for they are an abomination! 

12. Thrice cursed are the weak whose insecurity makes them vile, for they shall serve and 
suffer! 

13. The angel of self-deceit is camped in the souls of the "righteous" - The eternal flame 
of power through joy dwelleth within the flesh of the Satanist! 



(AIR) 



THE BOOK OF LUCIFER 

THE ENLIGHTENMENT 

The Roman god, Lucifer, was the bearer of light, the spirit of the air, the personification of 
enlightenment. In Christian mythology he became synonymous with evil, which was only to 
have been expected from a religion whose very existence is perpetuated by clouded 
definitions and bogus values! It is time to set the record straight. False moralisms and occult 
inaccuracies must be corrected. Entertaining as they might be, most stories and plays about 
Devil worship must be recognized as the obsolete absurdities they are. It has been said "the 
truth will make men free". The truth alone has never set anyone free. It is only doubt which 
will bring mental emancipation. Without the wonderful element of doubt, the doorway 
through which truth passes would be tightiy shut, impervious to the most strenuous poundings 
of a thousand Lucifers. How understandable that Holy Scripture should refer to the Infernal 
monarch as the "father of lies" - a magnificent example of character inversion. If one is to 
believe this theological accusation that the Devil represents falsehood, then it surely must be 
concurred that it was he, not god, that established all spiritual religions and who wrote all of the 
holy bibles ! When one doubt is followed by another, the bubble, grown large from long 
accumulated fallacies, threatens to burst. For those who already doubt supposed truths, this 
book is revelation. Then Lucifer will have risen. Now is the time for doubt! The bubble of 
falsehood is bursting and its sound is the roar of the world! 



-WANTED!- 

GOD 
DEAD OR ALIVE 



It is a popular misconception that the Satanist does not believe in God. The concept of 

f"God", as interpreted by man, has been so varied throughout the ages, that the Satanist 
simply accepts the definition which suits him best. Man has always created his gods, 
rather than his gods creating him. God is, to some, benign - to others, terrifying. To the 
Satanist "God" - by whatever name he is called, or by no name at all - is seen as the 
balancing factor in nature, and not as being concerned with suffering. This powerful 
force which permeates and balances the universe is far too impersonal to care about the 
happiness or misery of flesh- and-blood creatures on this ball of dirt upon which we 



live. 



Anyone who tliinks of Satan as evil should consider all the men, women, children, and 
animals who have died because it was "God's will". Certainly a person grieving the untimely 
loss of a loved one would much rather have their loved one with them than in God's hands! 
Instead, they are unctuously consoled by their clergyman who says, "It was God's will, my 
dear"; or "He is in God's hands now, my son." Such phrases have been a convenient way for 
religionists to condone or excuse the mercilessness of God. But if God is in complete control 
and as benign as he is supposed to be, why does He allow these things to happen? Too long 
have religionists been falling back on their bibles and rulebooks to prove or disprove, justify, 
condemn, or interpret. 

The Satanist realizes that man, and the action and reaction of the universe, is responsible for 
everything, and doesn't mislead himself into thinking that someone cares. No longer will we 
sit back and accept "fate" without doing anything about it, just because it says so in Chapter 
such and such, Psalm so and so - and that's that! The Satanist knows that praying does 
absolutely no good - in fact, it actually lessens the chance of success, for the devoutly 
religious too often sit back complacently and pray for a situation which, if they were to do 
something about it on their own, could be accomplished much quicker! 

The Satanist shuns terms such as "hope" and "prayer" as they are indicative of apprehension. 
If we hope and pray for something to come about, we will not act in a positive way which will 
make it happen. The Satanist, realizing that anything he gets is of his own doing, takes 
command of the situation instead of praying to God for it to happen. Positive minking and 
positive action add up to results. 

Just as the Satanist does not pray to God for assistance, he does not pray for forgiveness for 
his wrong doings. In other religions, when one commits a wrong he either prays to God for 
forgiveness, or confesses to an intermediary and asks him to pray to God for forgiveness for 
his sins. The Satanist knows that praying does no good, confessing to another human being, 
like himself, accomplishes even less - and is, furthermore, degrading. 

When a Satanist commits a wrong, he realizes that it is natural to make a mistake - and if he is 
truly sorry about what he has done, he will learn from it and take care not to do the same thing 
again. If he is not honestiy sorry about what he has done, and knows he will do the same thing 
over and over, he has no business confessing and asking forgiveness in the first place. But this 
is exactiy what happens. People confess their sins so that they can clear their consciences - 
and be free to go out and sin again, usually the same sin. 



and be free to go out and sin again, usually the same sin. 

There are many different interpretations of God, in the usual sense of the word, as there are 
types of people. The images run from a belief in a god who is some vague sort of "universal 
cosmic mind" to an anthropomorphic deity with a long white beard and sandals who keeps 
track of every action of each individual. 

Even within the confines of a given religion, the personal interpretations of God differ greatiy. 
Some religions actually go so far as to label anyone who belongs to a religious sect other than 
their own a heretic, even though the overall doctrines and impressions of godliness are nearly 
the same. For example: The Catholics believe that the Protestants are doomed to Hell simply 
because they do not belong to the Catholic Church. In the same way, many splinter groups of 
the Christian faith, such as the evangelical or revivalist churches, believe that the Catholics 
are heathens who worship graven images. (Christ is depicted in the image that is most 
psychologically akin to the individual worshipping him, and yet the Christians criticize 
"heathens" for the worship of graven images.) And the Jews have always been given the 
Devil's name. 

Even though the god in all of these religions is basically the same, each regards the way 
chosen by the others as reprehensible, and to top it all, religionists actually pray for one 
another! They have scorn for the brothers of the right-hand path because their religions carry 
different labels, and somehow this animosity must be released. What better way than through 
"prayer" ! What a simperingly polite way of saying: "I hate your guts," is the thinly disguised 
device known as praying for your enemy! Praying for one's own enemy is nothing more than 
bargain-basement anger, and of a decidedly shoddy and inferior quality! 

If there has been so much violent discrepancy as to the proper way in which to worship God, 
how many different interpretations of God can there be - and who is right? 

All devout "white- lighters" are concerned with pleasing God so that they might have the 
"Pearly Gates" opened for them when they die. Nevertheless, if a man has not lived his life in 
accordance with the regulations of his faith, he can at the last minute call a clergyman to his 
deathbed for a final absolution. The priest or minister will then come running on the double, 
to "make everything right" with God and see to it that his passport to the Heavenly Realm is 
in order. (The Yezidis, a sect of Devil worshippers, take a different viewpoint. They believe 
that God is all-powerful, but also all- forgiving, and so accordingly feel that it is the Devil 
whom they must please, as he is the one who rules their lives while here on earth. They 
believe so strongly that God will forgive all of their sins once they have been given the last 
rites, that they feel no need to concern themselves with the opinion God may hold of them 
while they live.) 

With all of the contradictions in the Christian scriptures, many people currently cannot 
rationally accept Christianity the way it has been practiced in the past. Great numbers of 
people are beginning to doubt the existence of God, in the established Christian sense of the 
word. So, they have taken to calling themselves "Christian Atheists". True, the Christian Bible 
is a mass of contradictions; but what could be more contradictory than the term "Christian 
Atheist"? 

If prominent leaders of the Christian faith are rejecting the past interpretations of God, how 
then can their followers be expected to adhere to previous religious tradition? 



With all the debates about whether or not God is dead, if he isn't he had better have medicare! 



jSa religions of a spiritual nature are inventions of man. He has created an entire 

system of gods with nothing more than his carnal brain. Just because he has an ego, 
Jm and cannot accept it, he has to externalize it into some great spiritual device which he 
/ calls "God". 

\ God can do all the things man is forbidden to do - such as kill people, perform miracles 
J to gratify his will, control without any apparent responsibility, etc. If man needs such a 
god and recognizes that god, then he is worshipping an entity that a human being 
invented. Therefore, he is worshipping by proxy the man that invented god. Is it not more sensible to 
worship a god that he, himself, has created, in accordance with his own emotional needs - one 
that best represents the very carnal and physical being that has the idea- power to invent a god 
in the first place? 

If man insists on externalizing his true self in the form of "God", then why fear his true self, in 
fearing "God", - why praise his true self in praising "God", - why remain externalized from 

"God" IN ORDER TO ENGAGE IN RITUAL AND RELIGIOUS CEREMONY IN HIS NAME? 

Man needs ritual and dogma, but no law states that an externalized god is necessary in order 
to engage in ritual and ceremony performed in a god's name! Could it be that when he closes 
the gap between himself and his "God" he sees the demon of pride creeping forth - that very 
embodiment of Lucifer appearing in his midst? He no longer can view himself in two parts, 
the carnal and the spiritual, but sees them merge as one, and then to his abysmal horror, 
discovers that they are only the carnal - and always were! Then he either hates himself to death, 
day by day - or rejoices that he is what he is! 

If he hates himself, he searches out new and more complex spiritual paths of "enlightenment" 
in hopes that he may split himself up again in his quest for stronger and more externalized 
"gods" to scourge his poor miserable shell. If he accepts himself, but recognizes that ritual and 
ceremony are the important devices that his invented religions have utilized to sustain his 
faith in a lie, then it is the same form of ritual that will sustain his faith in the truth - the 
primitive pageantry that will give his awareness of his own majestic being added substance. 

When all religious faith in lies has waned, it is because man has become closer to himself and 
farther from "God"; closer to the "Devil." If this is what the devil represents, and a man lives 
his life in the devil's fane, with the sinews of Satan moving in his flesh, then he either escapes 
from the cackhngs and carpings of the righteous, or stands proudly in his secret places of the 
earth and manipulates the folly- ridden masses through his own Satanic might, until that day 
when he may come forth in splendor proclaiming "i am a satanist! bow down, for i am the highest 

EMBODIMENT OF HUMAN LIFE!" 



THE GOD YOU SAVE 
MAY BE YOURSELF 




SOME EVIDENCE OF 
A NEW SATANIC AGE 



a The seven deadly sins of the Christian Church are: greed, pride, envy, anger, 

gluttony, lust, and sloth. Satanism advocates indulging in each of these "sins" as they 
W all lead to physical, mental, or emotional gratification. 

9 A Satanist knows there is nothing wrong with being greedy, as it only means that he 
\ wants more than he already has. Envy means to look with favor upon the possessions 
J of others, and to be desirous of obtaining similar things for oneself. Envy and greed are 
the motivating forces of ambition - and without ambition, very lMe of any importance 
would be accomplished. 

Gluttony is simply eating more than you need to keep yourself alive. When you have 
overeaten to the point of obesity, another sin - pride - will motivate you to regain an 
appearance that will renew your self-respect. 

Anyone who buys an article of clothing for a purpose other than covering his body and 
protecting it from the elements is guilty of pride. Satanists often encounter scoffers who 
maintain that labels are not necessary. It must be pointed out to these destroyers of labels that 
one or many articles they themselves are wearing are not wearing are not necessary to keep 
them warm. There is not a person on this earth who is completely devoid of ornamentation. 
The Satanist points out that any ornamentation of the scoffer's body shows that he, too, is 
guilty of pride. Regardless of how verbose the cynic may be in his intellectual description of 
how free he is, he is still wearing the elements of pride. 

Being reluctant to get up in the morning is to be guilty of sloth, and if you he in bed long 
enough you may find yourself committing yet another sin - lust. To have the faintest stirring of 
sexual desire is to be guilty of lust. In order to insure the propagation of humanity, nature 
made lust the second most powerful instinct, the first being self-preservation. Realizing this, 
the Christian Church made fornication the "Original Sin". In this way they made sure no one 
would escape sin. Your very state of being is as a result of sin - the Original sin! 

The strongest instinct in every living thing is self-preservation, which brings us to the last of 
the seven deadly sins - anger. Is it not our instinct for self-preservation that is aroused when 
someone harms us, when we become angry enough to protect ourselves from further attack? 
A Satanist practices the motto, "If a man smite thee on one cheek, smash him on the other!" 
Let no wrong go unredressed. Be as a lion in the path - be dangerous even in defeat! 

Since man's natural instincts lead him to sin, all men are sinners; and all sinners go to hell. If 
everyone goes to hell, then you will meet all your friends there. Heaven must be populated 
with some rather strange creatures if they all lived for was to go to a place where they can 
strum harps for eternity. 

"Times have changed. Religious leaders no longer preach that all our natural actions are 
sinful. We no longer think sex is dirty - or that taking pride in ourselves is shameful - or that 
wanting something someone else has is vicious." Of course not, times have changed! "If you 
want proof of this, just look at how liberal churches have become. Why, they're practicing all 
the things that you preach." 



Satanists hear these, and similar statements, all the time; and they agree wholeheartedly, but, 
if the world has changed so much, why continue to grasp at the threads of a dying faith? If 
many religions are denying their own scriptures because they are out of date, and are 
preaching the philosophies of Satanism, why not call it by its rightful name - Satanism? 
Certainly it would be far less hypocritical. 

In recent years there has been an attempt to humanize the spiritual concept of Christianity. 
This has manifested itself in the most obvious non- spiritual means. Masses which had been 
said in Latin are now said in native languages - which only succeeds in making the nonsense 
easier to understand, and at the same time robs the ceremony of the esoteric nature which is 
consistent with the tenets of the dogma. It is much simpler to obtain an emotional reaction 
using words and phrases that cannot be understood than it is with statements which even the 
simplest mind will question when hearing them in an understandable language. 

If priests and ministers were to have used the devices to fill their churches one hundred years 
ago that they use today, they would have been charged with heresy, called devils, oft-times 
persecuted, but certainly excommunicated without hesitation. 

The religionists wail, "We must keep up with the times," forgetting that, due to limiting 
factors and deeply engrained laws of white light religions, there can never be sufficient 
change to meet the needs of man. 

Past religions have always represented the spiritual nature of man, with little or no concern for 
his carnal or mundane needs. They have considered this life but transitory, and the flesh 
merely a shell; physical pleasure trivial, and pain a worthwhile preparation for the "Kingdom 
of God". How well the utter hypocrisy comes forth when the "righteous" make a change in 
their religion to keep up with man's natural change! The only way that Christianity can ever 
completely serve the needs of man is to become as Satanism is now. 

It has become necessary for a new religion, based on man's natural instincts, to come forth. 
they have named it. It is called Satanism. It is that power condemned that has caused the 
religious controversy over birth-control measures - a disgruntled admission that sexual 
activity, for fun, is here to stay. 

It is the "Devil" who caused women to show their legs, to titillate men - the same kind of legs, 
now socially acceptable to gaze upon, which are revealed by young nuns as they walk about 
in their shortened habits. What a delightful step in the right (or left) direction! Is it possible 
we will soon see "topless" nuns sensually throwing their bodies about to the "Missa Solemnis 
Rock"? Satan smiles and says he would like that fine - many nuns are very pretty girls with 
nice legs. 

Many churches with some of the largest congregations have the most hand- clapping, sensual 
music - also Satanically inspired. After all, the Devil has always had the best tunes. 

Church picnics, despite all of Aunt Martha's talk about the Lord's Bountiful Harvest, are 
nothing more than a good excuse for Sunday gluttony; and everyone knows that lots more 
than Bible reading goes on in the bushes. 

The fund-raising adjunct to many church bazaars is commonly known as a carnival, which 
used to mean the celebration of the flesh; now a carnival is okay because the money goes to 
the church so that it can preach against the temptations of the Devil! It will be said that these 



things are only pagan devices and ceremonies - that the Christians borrowed them. True, but 
the Pagans reveled in the delights of the flesh, and were condemned by the very same people 
who celebrate their rituals, but call them by different names. 

Priests and ministers are in the front lines of peace demonstrations, and lying on railroad 
tracks in front of trains carrying war materials, with as much dedication as their brothers of 
the cloth, from the same seminaries, who are blessing the bullets and bombs and fighting men 
as chaplains in the armed forces. Someone must be wrong, someplace. Could it be that Satan 
is the one qualified to act as accuser? Certainly they named him that! 

When a puppy reaches maturity it becomes a dog; when ice melts it is called water; when 
twelve months have been used up, we get a new calendar with the proper chronological name; 
when "magic" becomes scientific fact we refer to it as medicine, astronomy, etc. When one 
name is no longer appropriate for a given thing it is only logical to change it to a new one 
which better fits the subject. Why, then, do we not follow suit in the area of religion? Why 
continue to call a religion the same name when the tenets of that religion no longer fit the 
original one? Or, if religion does preach the same things that it always has, but its followers 
practice nearly none of its teachings, why do they continue to call themselves by the name 
given to followers of that religion? 

If you do not believe in what your religion teaches, why continue to support a belief which is 
contradictory with your feelings. You would never vote for a person or issue you did not 
believe in, so why cast your ecclesiastical vote for a religion which is not consistent with your 
convictions? You have no right to complain about a political situation you have voted for or 
supported in any way - which includes sitting back and complacently agreeing with neighbors 
who approve the situation, just because you are too lazy or cowardly to speak your mind. So it 
is with religious balloting. Even if you cannot be aggressively honest about your opinions 
because of unfavorable consequences from employers, community leaders, etc., you can, at 
least, be honest with yourself. In the privacy of your own home and with close friends you 
must support religion which has your best interests at heart. 

"Satanism is based on a very sound philosophy," say the emancipated. "But why call it 
Satanism? Why not call it something like 'Humanism' or a name that would have the 
connotation of a witchcraft group, something a little more esoteric - something less blatant." 
There is more than one reason for this. Humanism is not a religion. It is simply a way of life 
with no ceremony or dogma. Satanism has both ceremony and dogma. Dogma, as will be 
explained, is necessary. 

Satanism differs greatly from all other so-called white- light, "white" witchcraft or magical 
groups in the world today. These self-righteous and supercilious religions protest that their 
members use the powers of magic only for altruistic purposes. Satanists look with disdain 
upon "white" witchcraft groups because they feel that altruism is sinning on the lay- away 
plan. It is unnatural not to have desire to gain things for yourself. Satanism represents a form 
of controlled selfishness. This does not mean that you never do anything for anyone else. If 
you do something to make someone for whom you care happy, his happiness will give you a 
sense of gratification. 

Satanism advocates practicing a modified form of the Golden Rule. Our interpretation of this 
rule is: "Do unto others as they do unto you"; because if you "Do unto others as you would 
have them do unto you," and they, in turn, treat you badly, it goes against human nature to 
continue to treat them with consideration. You should do unto others as you would have them 



do unto you, but if your courtesy is not returned, they should be treated with the wrath they 
deserve. 

White witchcraft groups say that if you curse a person, it will return to you three- fold, come 
home to roost, or in some way boomerang back to the sender. This is yet another indication of 
the guilt- ridden philosophy which is held by these neo- Pagan, pseudo- Christian groups. White 
witches want to delve into witchcraft, but cannot divorce themselves from the stigma attached 
to it. Therefore, they call themselves white magicians, and base seventy- five per cent of their 
philosophy on the trite and hackneyed tenets of Christianity. Anyone who pretends to be 
interested in magic or the occult for reasons other that gaining personal power is the worst 
kind of hypocrite. The Satanist respects Christianity for, at least, being consistent in its guilt- 
ridden philosophy, but can only feel contempt for the people who attempt to appear 
emancipated from guilt by joining a witchcraft group, and then practice the same basic 
philosophy as Christianity. 

White magic is supposedly utilized only for good or unselfish purposes, and black magic, we 
are told, is used only for selfish or "evil" reasons. Satanism draws no such dividing line. 
Magic is magic, be it used to help or hinder. The Satanist, being the magician, should have the 
ability to decide what is just, and then apply the powers of magic to attain his goals. 

During white magical ceremonies, the practitioners stand within a pentagram to protect 
themselves from the "evil" forces which they call upon for help. To the Satanist, it seems a bit 
two-faced to call on these forces for help, while at the same time protecting yourself from the 
very powers you have asked for assistance. The Satanist realizes that only by putting himself 
in league with these forces can be fully and unhypocritically utilize the Powers of Darkness to 
his best advantage. 

In a Satanic magical ceremony, the participants do not: join hands and dance "ring around the 
rosy" in a circle; bum candles of various colors for various wishes; call out the names of 
"Father, Son and Holy Ghost" while supposedly practicing Black Arts; pick a "Saint" for their 
personal guide in obtaining help for their problems; dunk themselves in smelly oils and hope 
the money comes in; meditate so they can arrive at a "great spiritual awakening"; recite long 
incantations with the name of Jesus thrown in for good measure, between every few words, 
etc., etc., etc., ad nauseam! 

because - This is not the way to practice Satanic magic. If you cannot divorce yourself from 
hypocritical self-deceit, you will never be successful as a magician, much less a Satanist. 

The Satanic religion has not merely lifted the coin - it has flipped it completely over. 
Therefore, why should it support the very principles to which it is completely opposed by 
calling itself anything other than a name which is totally in keeping with the reversed 
doctrines which make up the Satanic philosophy? Satanism is not a white light religion; it is a 
religion of the flesh, the mundane, the carnal - all of which are ruled by Satan, the 
personification of the Left Hand Path. 

Inevitably, the next question asked is: "Granted, you can't call it humanism because 
humanism is not a religion; but why even have a religion in the first place if all you do is what 
comes naturally, anyway? Why not just do it?" 

Modern man has come a long way; he has become disenchanted with the nonsensical dogmas 
of past religions. We are living in an enlightened age. Psychiatry has made great strides in 



enlightening man about his true personality. We are living in an era of intellectual awareness 
unlike any the world has ever seen. 

This is all very well and good, but - there is one flaw in this new state of awareness. It is one 
thing to accept something intellectually, but to accept the same thing emotionally is an 
entirely different matter. The one need that psychiatry cannot fill is man's inherent need for 
emotionalizing through dogma. Man needs ceremony and ritual, fantasy and enchantment. 
Psychiatry, despite all the good it has done, has robbed man of wonder and fantasy which 
religion, in the past, has provided. 

Satanism, realizing the current needs of man, fills the large grey void between religion and 
psychiatry. The Satanic philosophy combines the fundamentals of psychology and good, 
honest emotionalizing, or dogma. It provides man with his much needed fantasy. There is 
nothing wrong with dogma, providing it is not based on ideas and actions which go 
completely against human nature. 

The quickest way of traveling between two points is in a straight line. If all the guilts that 
have been built up can be turned into advantages, it ehrninates the need for intellectual 
purging of the psyche in an attempt to cleanse it from these repressions. Satanism is the only 
religion known to man that accepts man as he is, and promotes the rationale of turning a bad 
thing into a good thing rather than bending over backwards to eliminate the bad thing. 

Therefore, after intellectually evaluating your problems through common sense and drawing 
on what psychiatry has taught us, if you still cannot emotionally release yourself from 
unwarranted guilt, and put your theories into action, then you should learn to make your guilt 
work for you. You should act upon your natural instincts, and then, if you cannot perform 
without feeling guilty, revel in your guilt. This may sound like a contradiction in terms, but if 
you will think about it, guilt can often add a fillip to the senses. Adults would do well to take 
a lesson from children. Children often take great delight in doing something they know they 
are not supposed to. 

Yes, times have changed, but man hasn't. The basics of Satanism have always existed. The 
only thing that is new is the formal organization of a religion based on the universal traits of 
man. For centuries, magnificent structures of stone, concrete, mortar, and steel have been 
devoted to man's abstinence. It is high time that human beings stopped fighting themselves, 
and devoted their time to building temples designed for man's indulgences. 

Even though times have changed, and always will, man remains basically the same. For two 
thousand years man has done penance for something he never should have had to feel guilty 
about in the first place. We are tired of denying ourselves the pleasures of life which we 
deserve. Today, as always, man needs to enjoy himself here and now, instead of waiting for 
his rewards in heaven. So, why not have a religion based on indulgence? Certainly, it is 
consistent with the nature of the beast. We are no longer supplicating weaklings trembling 
before an unmerciful "God" who cares not whether we live or die. We are self-respecting, 
prideful people - we are Satanists! 



HELL, THE DEVIL, 

AND HOW TO 
SELL YOUR SOUL 




S atan has certainly been the best friend the church has ever had, as he has kept it in 

business all these years. The false doctrine of Hell and the Devil has allowed the 
Protestant and Catholic Churches to flourish far too long. Without a devil to point their 
fingers at, rehgionists of the right hand path would have nothing with which to threaten 
their followers. "Satan leads you to temptation"; "Satan is the prince of evil"; "Satan is 
vicious, cruel, brutal," they warn. "If you give in to the temptations of the devil, you 
will surely suffer eternal damnation and roast in Hell." 

The semantic meaning of Satan is the "adversary" or "opposition" or the "accuser". The very 
word "devil" comes from the Indian devi which means "god". Satan represents opposition to 
all religions which serve to frustrate and condemn man for his natural instincts. He has been 
given an evil role simply because he represents the carnal, earthly, and mundane aspects of 
life. 

Satan, the chief devil of the Western World, was originally an angel whose duty was to report 
human delinquencies to God. It was not until the Fourteenth Century that he began to be 
depicted as an evil deity who was part man and part animal, with goat- like horns and hooves. 
Before Christianity gave him the names of Satan, Lucifer, etc., the carnal side of man's nature 
was governed by the god which was then called Dionysus, or Pan, depicted as a satyr or faun, 
by the Greeks. Pan was originally the "good guy", and symbolized fertility and fecundity. 

Whenever a nation comes under a new form of government, the heroes of the past become 
villains of the present. So it is with religion. The earliest Christians believed that the Pagan 
deities were devils, and to employ them was to use "black magic". Miraculous heavenly 
events they termed "white magic"; this was the sole distinction between the two. The old gods 
did not die, they fell into Hell and became devils. The bogey, goblin, or bugaboo used to 
frighten children is derived from the Slavonic "Bog" which means "god", as does Bhaga in 
Hindu. 

Many pleasures revered before the advent of Christianity were condemned by the new 
religion. It required little changeover to transform the horns and cloven hooves of Pan into a 
most convincing devil! Pan's attributes could be neatiy changed into charged- with- punishment 
sins, and so the metamorphosis was complete. 

The association of the goat with the Devil is found in the Christian Bible, where the holiest 
day of the year, the Day of Atonement, was celebrated by casting lots for two goats "without 
blemish", one to be offered to the Lord, and one to Azazel. The goat carrying the sins of the 
people was driven into the desert and became a "scapegoat". This is the origin of the goat 
which is still used in lodge ceremonies today as it was also used in Egypt, where once a year 
it was sacrificed to a God. 

The devils of mankind are many, and their origins diversified. The performance of Satanic 
ritual does not embrace the calling forth of demons; this practice is followed only by those 
who are in fear of the very forces they conjure. 




Supposedly, demons are malevolent spirits with attributes conductive to the deterioration of 
the people or events that they touch upon. The Greek word demon meant a guardian spirit or 
source of inspiration, and to be sure, later theologians invented legion upon legion of these 
harbingers of inspiration - all wicked. 

An indication of the cowardice of "magicians" of the right-hand path is the practice of calling 
upon a particular demon (who would supposedly be a minion of the devil) to do his bidding. 
The assumption is that the demon, being only a flunky of the devil, is easier to control. Occult 
lore states that only the most formidably "protected" or insanely foolhardy sorcerer would try 
to call forth the Devil himself. 

The Satanist does not furtively call upon these "lesser" devils, but brazenly invokes those who 
people that infernal army of long-standing outrage - the Devils themselves! 

Theologians have catalogued some of the names of devils in their lists of demons, as might be 
expected, but the roster which follows contains the names and origins of the Gods and 
Goddesses called upon, which make up a large part of the occupancy of the Royal Palace of 
Hell: 

THE FOUR CROWN PRINCES OF HELL 

satan - (Hebrew) adversary, opposite, accuser, Lord of fire, the inferno, the south 
lucifer - (Roman) bringer of light, enlightenment, the air, the morning star, the east 
belial - (Hebrew) without a master, baseness of the earth, independence, the north 
leviathan - (Hebrew) the serpent out of the deeps, the sea, the west 

THE INFERNAL NAMES 

Abaddon - (Hebrew) the destroyer 
Adramelech - Samarian devil 
Ahpuch - Mayan devil 
Ahriman - Mazdean devil 

Anion - Egyptian ram- headed god of life and reproduction 
Apollyon - Greek synonym for Satan, the arch fiend 

Asmodeus - Hebrew devil of sensuality and luxury, originally "creature of judgement" 

Astaroth - Phoenician goddess of lasciviousness, equivalent of Babylonian Ishtar 

Azazel - (Hebrew) taught man to make weapons of war, introduced cosmetics 

Baalberith - Canaanite Lord of the covenant who was later made a devil 

Balaam - Hebrew Devil of avarice and greed 

Baphomet - worshipped by the Templars as symbolic of Satan 

Bast - Egyptian goddess of pleasure represented by the cat 

Beelzebub - (Hebrew) Lord of the Flies, taken from symbolism of the scarab 

Behemoth - Hebrew personification of Satan in the form of an elephant 

Beherit - Syriac name for Satan 

Bile - Celtic god of Hell 

Chemosh - national god of Moabites, later a devil 
Cimeries - rides a black horse and rules Africa 
Coyote - American Indian devil 
Dagon - Philistine avenging devil of the sea 
Damballa - Voodoo serpent god 

Demogorgon - Greek name of the devil, it is said should not be known to mortals 



Diabolus - ( Greek) "flowing downwards" 

Dracula - Romanian name for devil 

Emma-O - Japanese ruler of Hell 

Euronymous - Greek prince of death 

Fenriz - son of Loki, depicted as a wolf 

Gorgo - dim. of Demogorgon, Greek name of the devil 

Haborym - Hebrew synonym for Satan 

Hecate - Greek goddess of the underworld and witchcraft 

Ishtar - Babylonian goddess of fertility 

Kali - (Hindu) daughter of Shiva, high priestess of the Thuggees 
Lilith - Hebrew female devil, Adam's first wife who taught him the ropes 
Loki - Teutonic devil 

Mammon - Aramaic god of wealth and profit 
Mania - Etruscan goddess of Hell 
Mantus - Etruscan god of Hell 
Marduk - god of the city of Babylon 
Mastema - Hebrew synonym for Satan 
Melek Taus - Yezidi devil 

Mephistopheles - ( Greek) he who shuns the light, q. v. Faust 

Metztli - Aztec goddess of the night 

Mictian - Aztec god of death 

Midgard - son of Loki, depicted as a serpent 

Milcom - Ammonite devil 

Moloch - Phoenician and Canaanite devil 

Mormo - ( Greek) King of the Ghouls, consort of Hecate 

Naamah - Hebrew female devil of seduction 

Nergal - Babylonian god of Hades 

Nihasa - American Indian devil 

Nija - Polish god of the underworld 

O-Yama - Japanese name for Satan 

Pan - Greek god of lust, later relegated to devildom 

Pluto - Greek god of the underworld 

Proserpine - Greek queen of the underworld 

Pwcca - Welsh name for Satan 

Rimmon - Syrian devil worshipped at Damascus 

Sabazios - Phrygian origin, identified with Dionysos, snake worship 

Saitan - Enochian equivalent of Satan 

Sammael - (Hebrew) "venom of God" 

Samnu - Central Asian devil 

Sedit - American Indian devil 

Sekhmet - Egyptian goddess of vengeance 

Set - Egyptian devil 

Shaitan - Arabic name for Satan 

Shiva - (Hindu) the destroyer 

Supay - Inca god of the underworld 

T'an-mo - Chinese counterpart to the devil, covetousness, desire 
Tchort - Russian name for Satan, "black god" 
Tezcatlipoca - Aztec god of Hell 

Thamuz - Sumerian god who later was relegated to devildom 
Thoth - Egyptian god of magic 
Tunrida - Scandinavian female devil 



Typhon - Greek personification of Satan 
Yaotzin - Aztec god of Hell 
Yen-lo-Wang - Chinese ruler of Hell 

The devils of past religions have always, at least in part, had animal characteristics, evidence 
of man's constant need to deny that he too is an animal, for to do so would serve a mighty 
blow to his impoverished ego. 

The pig was despised by the Jews and the Egyptians. It symbolized the gods Frey, Osiris, 
Adonis, Persephone, Attis, and Demeter, and was sacrificed to Osiris and the Moon. But, in 
time, it became degraded into a devil. The Phoenicians worshipped a fly god, Baal, from which 
comes the devil, Beelzebub. Both Baal and Beelzebub are identical to the dung beetle or 
scarabaeus of the Egyptians which appeared to resurrect itself, much as the mythical bird, the 
phoenix, rose from its own ashes. The ancient Jews believed, through their contact with the 
Persians, that the two great forces in the world were Ahura- Mazda, the god of fire, tight, life, 
and goodness; and Ahriman, the serpent, the god of darkness, destruction, death, and evil. 
These, and countless other examples, not only depict man's devils as animals, but also show 
his need to sacrifice the original animal gods and demote them to his devils. 

At the time of the Reformation, in the Sixteenth Century, the alchemist, Dr. Johann Faustus, 
discovered a method of summoning a demon - Mephistopheles - from Hell and making a pact 
with him. He signed a contract in blood to turn his soul over to Mephistopheles in return for 
the feeling of youth, and at once became young. When the time came for Faustus to die, he 
retired to his room and was blown to bits as though his laboratory had exploded. This story is 
a protest of the times (the Sixteenth Century) against science, chemistry, and magic. 

To the Satanist, it is unnecessary to sell your soul to the Devil or make a pact with Satan. This 
threat was devised by Christianity to terrorize people so they would not stray from the fold. 
With scolding fingers and trembling voices, they taught their followers that if they gave in to 
the temptations of Satan, and lived their lives according to their natural predilections, they 
would have to pay for their sinful pleasures by giving their souls to Satan and suffering in 
Hell for all eternity. People were led to believe that a pure soul was a passport to everlasting 
life. 

Pious prophets have taught man to fear Satan. But what of terms like "God fearing"? If God is 
so merciful, why do people have to fear him? Are we to believe there is nowhere we can turn 
to escape fear? If you have to fear God, why not be "Satan fearing" and at least have the fun 
that being God fearing denies you? Without such a wholesale fear religionists would have had 
nothing with which to wield power over their followers. 

The Teutonic Goddess of the Dead and daughter of Loki was named Hel, a Pagan god of 
torture and punishment. Another "L" was added when the books of the Old Testament were 
formulated. The prophets who wrote the Bible did not know the word "Hell"; they used the 
Hebrew Sheol and the Greek Hades, which meant the grave; also the Greek Tartaros, which 
was the abode of fallen angels, the underworld (inside the earth), and Gehenna, which was a 
valley near Jerusalem where Moloch reigned and garbage was dumped and burned. It is from 
this that the Christian Church has evolved the idea of "fire and brimstone" in Hell. 

The Protestant Hell and the Catholic Hell are places of eternal punishment; however, the 
Catholics also believe there is a "Purgatory" where all souls go for a time, and a "Limbo" 
where unbaptized souls go. The Buddhist Hell is divided into eight sections, the first seven of 



which can be expiated. The ecclesiastical description of Hell is that of a horrible place of fire 
and torment; in Dante's Inferno, and in northern climes, it was thought to be an icy cold 
region, a giant refrigerator. 

(Even with all their threats of eternal damnation and soul roasting, Christian missionaries 
have run across some who were not so quick to swallow their drivel. Pleasure and pain, like 
beauty, are in the eye of the beholder. So, when missionaries ventured into Alaska and warned 
the Eskimos of the horrors of Hell and the blazing lake of fire awaiting transgressors, they 
eagerly asked: "How do we get there?" !) 

Most Satanists do not accept Satan as an anthropomorphic being with cloven hooves, a barbed 
tail, and horns. He merely represents a force in nature - the powers of darkness which have 
been named just that because no religion has taken these forces out of the darkness. Nor has 
science been able to apply technical terminology to this force. It is an untapped reservoir that 
few can make use of because they lack the ability use a tool without having to first break 
down and label all the parts which make it run. It is this incessant need to analyze which 
prohibits most people from taking advantage of this many faceted key to the unknown - which 
the Satanist chooses to call "Satan". 

Satan, as a god, demi-god, personal saviour, or whatever you wish to call him, was invented 
by the formulators of every religion on the face of the earth for only one purpose - to preside 
over man's so-called wicked activities and situations here on earth. Consequently, anything 
resulting in physical or mental gratification was defined as "evil" - thus assuring a lifetime of 
unwarranted guilt for everyone! 

So, if "evil" they have named us, evil we are - and so what! The Satanic Age is upon us! Why 
not take advantage of it and LIVE! 



LOVE AND HATE 




Satanism represents kindness to those who deserve it instead of love wasted on 
ingrates! 

You cannot love everyone; it is ridiculous to think you can. If you love everyone and 
everything you lose your natural powers of selection and wind up being a pretty poor 
judge of character and quality. If anything is used too freely it loses its true meaning. 
Therefore, the Satanist believes you should love strongly and completely those who 
deserve your love, but never turn the other cheek to your enemy! 

Love is one of the most intense emotions felt by man; another is hate. Forcing yourself to feel 
indiscriminate love is very unnatural. If you try to love everyone you only lessen your 
feelings for those who deserve your love. Repressed hatred can lead to many physical and 
emotional ailments. By learning to release your hatred towards those who deserve it, you 
cleanse yourself of these malignant emotions and need not take your pent-up hatred out on 
your loved ones. 

There has never been a great "love" movement in the history of the world that hasn't wound 
up killing countless numbers of people, we must assume, to prove how much they loved 
them! Every hypocrite who ever walked the earth has had pockets bulging with love! 

Every pharisaical rehgionist claims to love his enemies, even though when wronged he 
consoles himself by tMnking "God will punish them". Instead of admitting to themselves that 
they are capable of hating their foes and treating them in the manner they deserve, they say: 
"There, but for the grace of God, go I," and "pray" for them. Why should we humiliate and 
lower ourselves by drawing such inaccurate comparisons? 

Satanism has been thought of as being synonymous with cruelty and brutality. This is so only 
because people are afraid to face the truth - and the truth is that human beings are not all 
benign or all loving. Just because the Satanist admits he is capable of both love and hate, he is 
considered hateful. On the contrary, because he is able to give vent to his hatred through 
ritualized expression, he is far more capable of love - the deepest kind of love. By honestiy 
recognizing and admitting to both the hate and the love he feels, there is no confusing one 
emotion with the other. Without being able to experience one of these emotions, you cannot 
fully experience the other. 



SATANIC SEX 




TVIuch controversy has arisen over the Satanic views on "free love". It is often 

assumed that sexual activity is the most important factor of the Satanic religion, and 
that willingness to participate in sex- orgies is a prerequisite for becoming a Satanist. 
Nothing could be farther from the truth! In fact, opportunists who have no deeper 
interest in Satanism than merely the sexual aspects are emphatically discouraged. 

Satanism does advocate sexual freedom, but only in the true sense of the word. Free 
love, in the Satanic concept, means exactly that - freedom to either be faithful to one 
person or to indulge your sexual desires with as many others as you feel is necessary to satisfy 
your particular needs. 

Satanism does not encourage orgiastic activity or extramarital affairs for those to whom they 
do not come naturally. For many, it would be very unnatural and detrimental to be unfaithful 
to their chosen mates. To others, it would be frustrating to be bound sexually to just one 
person. Each person must decide for himself what form of sexual activity best suits his 
individual needs. Self- deceitfully forcing yourself to be adulterous or to have sex partners 
when not married just for the sake of proving others (or worse yet, to yourself) that you are 
emancipated from sexual guilt is just as wrong, by Satanic standards, as leaving any sexual 
need unfulfilled because of ingrained feelings of guilt. 

Many of those who are constantly preoccupied with demonstrating their emancipation from 
sexual guilt are, in reality, held in even greater sexual bondage than those who simply accept 
sexual activity as a natural part of life and don't make a big to-do over their sexual freedom. 
For example, it is an established fact that the nymphomaniac (every man's dream girl and 
heroine of all lurid novels) is not sexually free, but is actually frigid and roves from man to 
man because she is too inhibited to ever find complete sexual release. 

Another misconception is the idea that ability to engage in group sexual activity is the 
indicative of sexual freedom. All contemporary free- sex groups have one thing in common - 
discouragement of fetishistic or deviant activity. 

Actually, the most forced examples of non- fetishistic sexual activity thinly disguised as 
"freedom" have a common format. Each of the participants in an orgy removes all clothing, 
following the example set forth by one, and mechanically fornicate - also following the 
leader's example. None of the performers consider that their "emancipated" form of sex might 
be regarded as regimented and infantile by non- members who fail to equate uniformity with 
freedom. 

The Satanist realizes that if he is to be a sexual connoisseur (and truly free from all sexual 
guilt) he cannot be stifled by the so-called sexual revolutionists any more than he can by the 
prudery of his guilt- ridden society. These free- sex clubs miss the whole point of sexual 
freedom. Unless sexual activity can be expressed on an individual basis (which includes 
personal fetishes), there is absolutely no purpose in belonging to a sexual freedom 
organization. 

Satanism condones any type of sexual activity which properly satisfies your individual desires 
- be it heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, or even asexual, if you choose. Satanism also 




sanctions any fetish or deviation which will enhance your sex- life, so long as it involves no 
one who does not wish to be involved. 

The prevalence of deviant and/or fetishistic behavior in our society would stagger the 
imagination of the sexually naive. There are more sexual variants than the unenlightened 
individual can perceive: transvestism, sadism, masochism, urolagnia, exhibitionism - to name 
only a few of the more predominant. Everyone has some form of fetish, but because they are 
unaware of the preponderance of fetishistic activity in our society, they feel they are depraved 
if they submit to their "unnatural" yearnings. 

Even the asexual has a deviation - his asexuality. It is far more abnormal to have a lack of 
sexual desire (unless illness or old-age, or another valid reason has caused the wane) than it is 
to be sexually promiscuous. However, if a Satanist chooses sexual sublimination above overt 
sexual expression, that is entirely his own affair. In many cases of sexual sublimination (or 
asexuality), any attempt to emancipate himself sexually would prove devastating to the 
asexual. 

Asexuals are invariably sexually sublimated by their jobs or hobbies. All the energy and 
driving interest which would normally be devoted to sexual activity is channeled into other 
pastimes or into their chosen occupations. If a person favors other interests over sexual 
activity, it is his right, and no one is justified in condemning him for it. However, the person 
should at least recognize the fact that this is a sexual sublimation. 

Because of lack of opportunity for expression, many secret sexual desires never progress 
beyond the fantasy stage. Lack of release often leads to compulsion and, therefore, a great 
number of people devise undetectable methods of giving vent to their urges. Just because 
most fetishistic activity is not outwardly apparent, the sexually unsophisticated should not 
delude himself into tliinking it does not exist. To cite examples of the ingenious techniques 
used: The male transvestite will indulge in his fetish by wearing feminine undergarments 
while going about his daily activities; or the masochistic woman might wear a rubber girdle 
several sizes too small, so she may derive sexual pleasure from her fetishistic discomfort 
throughout the day, with no one the wiser. These illustrations are far tamer and more 
prevalent examples than others which could have been given. 

Satanism encourages any form of sexual expression you may desire, so long as it hurts no one 
else. This statement must be qualified, to avoid misinterpretation. By not hurting another, this 
does not include the unintentional hurt felt by those who might not agree with your views on 
sex, because of their anxieties regarding sexual morality. Naturally, you should avoid 
offending others who mean a great deal to you, such as prudish friends and relatives. 
However, if you earnestly endeavor to escape hurting them, and despite your efforts they 
accidentally find out, you cannot be held responsible, and therefore should feel no guilt as a 
result of either your sexual convictions, or their being hurt because of those convictions. If 
you are in constant fear of offending the prudish by your attitude towards sex, then there is no 
sense in trying to emancipate yourself from sexual guilt. However, no purpose is served by 
flaunting your permissiveness. 

The other exception to the rule regards dealings with masochists. A masochist derives 
pleasure from being hurt; so denying the masochist his pleasure- through- pain hurts him just as 
much as actual physical pain hurts the non- masochist. The story of the truly cruel sadist 
illustrates this point: The masochist says to the sadist, "beat me." To which the merciless 
sadist replies, 'ko!" If a person wants to be hurt and enjoys suffering, then there is no reason 



not to indulge him in his wont. 



The term "sadist" in popular usage describes one who obtains pleasure from indiscriminate 
brutality. Actually, though, a true sadist is selective. He carefully chooses from the vast 
reserve of appropriate victims, and takes great delight in giving those who thrive on misery 
the fulfillment of their desires. The "well-adjusted" sadist is epicurean in selecting those on 
whom his energies will be well- spent! If a person is healthy enough to admit he is a masochist 
and enjoys being enslaved and whipped, the real sadist is glad to oblige! 

Aside from the foregoing exceptions, the Satanist would not intentionally hurt others by 
violating their sexual rights. If you attempt to impose your sexual desires upon others who do 
not welcome your advances, you are Mringing upon their sexual freedom. Therefore, 
Satanism does not advocate rape, child molesting, sexual defilement of animals, or any other 
form of sexual activity which entails the participation of those who are unwilling or whose 
innocence or naivete would allow them to be intimidated or misguided into doing something 
against their wishes. 

If all parties involved are mature adults who willingly take full responsibility for their actions 
and voluntarily engage in a given form of sexual expression - even if it is generally 
considered taboo - then there is no reason for them to repress their sexual inclinations. 

If you are aware of all the implications, advantages, and disadvantages, and are certain your 
actions will hurt no one who does not wish or deserve to be hurt, you have no cause to 
suppress your sexual preferences. 

Just as no two people are exactly the same in their choice of diet or have the same capacity for 
the consumption of food, sexual tastes and appetites vary from person to person. No person or 
society has the right to set limitations on the sexual standards or the frequency of sexual 
activity of another. Proper sexual conduct can only be judged within the context of each 
individual situation. Therefore, what one person considers sexually correct and moral may be 
frustrating to another. The reverse is also true; one person may have great sexual prowess, but 
it is unjust for him to belittle another whose sexual capacity may not equal his own, and 
inconsiderate for him to impose himself upon the other person, i.e., the man who has a 
voracious sexual appetite, but whose wife's sexual needs do not match his own. It is unfair for 
him to expect her to enthusiastically respond to his overtures; but she must display the same 
degree of thoughtfulness. In the instances when she does not feel great passion, she should 
either passively, but pleasantly, accept him sexually, or raise no complaint if he chooses to 
find his needed release elsewhere - including auto- erotic practices. 

The ideal relationship is one in which the people are deeply in love with one another and are 
sexually compatible. However, perfect relationships are relatively uncommon. It is important 
to point out here that spiritual love and sexual love can, but do not necessarily, go hand in 
hand. If there is a certain amount of sexual compatibility, often it is limited; and some, but not 
all, of the sexual desires will be fulfilled. 

There is no greater sexual pleasure than that derived from association with someone you 
deeply love, if you are sexually well- suited. If you are not suited to one another sexually, 
though, it must be stressed that lack of sexual compatibility does not indicate lack of spiritual 
love. One can, and often does, exist without the other. As a matter of fact, often one member 
of a couple will resort to outside sexual activity because he deeply loves his mate, and wishes 
to avoid hurting or imposing upon his loved one. Deep spiritual love is enriched by sexual 



love, and it is certainly a necessary ingredient for any satisfactory relationship; but because of 
differing sexual predilections, outside sexual activity or masturbation sometimes provides a 
needed supplement. 

Masturbation, considered a sexual taboo by many people, creates a guilt problem not easily 
dealt with. Much emphasis must be placed on this subject, as it constitutes an extremely 
important ingredient of many a successful magical working. 

Ever since the Judaeo- Christian Bible described the sin of Onan (Gen. 38:7-10), man has 
considered the seriousness and consequences of the "solitary vice". Even though modem 
sexologists have explained the sin of Onan as simply coitus interruptus, the damage has been 
done through centuries of theological misinterpretation. 

Aside from actual sex crimes, masturbation is one of the most frowned upon sexual acts. 
During the last century, innumerable texts were written describing the horrific consequences 
of masturbation. Practically all physical or mental illnesses were attributed to the evils of 
masturbation. Pallor of the complexion, shortness of breath, furtive expression, sunken chest, 
nervousness, pimples and loss of appetite are only a few of the many characteristics 
supposedly resulting from masturbation; total physical and mental collapse was assured if one 
did not heed the warnings in those handbooks for young men. 

The lurid descriptions in such texts would be almost humorous, were it not for the unhappy 
fact that even though contemporary sexologists, doctors, writers, etc. have done much to 
remove the stigma of masturbation, the deep-seated guilts induced by the nonsense in those 
sexual primers have been only partially erased. A large percentage of people, especially those 
over forty, cannot emotionally accept the fact that masturbation is natural and healthy, even if 
they now accept it intellectually; and they, in turn, relate their repugnance, often 
subconsciously, to their children. 

It was thought that one would go insane if, despite numerous admonitions, his auto- erotic 
practices persisted. This preposterous myth grew from reports of wide- spread masturbation by 
the inmates of mental institutions. It was assumed that since almost all incurably insane 
people masturbated, it was their masturbation that had driven them mad. No one ever stopped 
to consider the lack of sexual partners of the opposite sex and the freedom from inhibition, 
which is a characteristic of extreme insanity, were the real reasons for the masturbatory 
practices of the insane. 

Many people would rather have their mates seek outside sexual activity than perform auto- 
erotic acts because of their own guilt feelings, the mate's repugnance towards having them 
engage in masturbation, or the fear of their mate's repugnance - although in a surprising 
number of cases, a vicarious thrill is obtained from the knowledge that the mate is having 
sexual experiences with outsiders - although this is seldom admitted. 

If stimulation is provided by envisioning one's mate sexually engaged with others, this should 
be brought out into the open where both parties may gain from such activities. However, if the 
prohibition of masturbation is only due to guilt feelings on the part of one or both parties, they 
should make every attempt to erase those guilts - or utilize them. Many relationships might be 
saved from destruction if the people involved did not feel guilt about performing the natural 
act of masturbation. 

Masturbation is regarded as evil because it produces pleasure derived from intentionally 



fondling a "forbidden" area of the body by one's own hand. The guilt feelings accompanying 
most sexual acts can be assuaged by the religiously- acceptable contention that your sensual 
delights are necessary to produce off- spring - even though you cautiously watch the calendar 
for the "safe" days. You cannot, however, placate yourself with this rationale while engaging 
in masturbatory practices. 

No matter what you've been told about the "immaculate conception" - even if blind faith 
allows you to swallow this absurdity - you know full well if you are to produce a child, there 
must be sexual contact with a person of the opposite sex! If you feel guilty for committing the 
"original sin," you certainly will feel even deeper guilt for performing a sex act only for self- 
gratification, with no intention of creating children. 

The Satanist fully realizes why religionists declare masturbation to be sinful. Like all other 
natural acts people will do it, no matter how severely reprimanded. Causing guilt is an 
important facet of their malicious scheme to obligate people to atone for "sins" by paying the 
mortgages on temples of abstinence! 

Even if a person is no longer struggling under the burden of religiously- induced guilt (or 
thinks he isn't), modem man still feels shame if he yields to his masturbatory desires. A man 
may feel robbed of his masculinity if he satisfies himself auto-erotically rather than engaging 
in the competitive game of woman chasing. A woman may satisfy herself sexually but yearns 
for the ego -gratification that comes from the sport of seduction. Neither the quasi Casanova 
nor bogus vamp feels adequate when "reduced" to masturbation for sexual gratification; both 
would prefer even an inadequate partner. Satanically speaking, though, it is far better to 
engage in a perfect fantasy than to cooperate in an unrewarding experience with another 
person. With masturbation, you are in complete control of the situation. 

To illustrate the undebatable fact that masturbation is an entirely normal and healthy practice: 
it is performed by all members of the animal kingdom. Human children will also follow their 
instinctive masturbatory desires, unless they have been scolded for it by their indignant parents, 
who were undoubtably berated for it by their parents, and so on down the retrocedent line. 

It is unfortunate, but true, that the sexual guilts of parents will immutably be passed on to their 
children. In order to save our children from the ill-fated sexual destiny of our parents, 
grandparents, and possibly ourselves, the perverted moral code of the past must be exposed 
for what it is: a pragmatically organized set of rules which, if rigidly obeyed, would destroy 
us! Unless we emancipate ourselves from the ridiculous sexual standards of our present 
society, including the so-called sexual revolution, the neuroses caused by those stifling 
regulations will persist. Adherence to the sensible and humanistic new morality of Satanism 
can - and will - evolve society in which our children can grow up healthy and without the 
devastating moral encumbrances of our existing sick society. 



NOT ALL VAMPIRES 
SUCK BLOOD! 




Satanism represents responsibility to the responsible, instead of concern for psychic 
vampires. 

Many people who walk the earth practice the fine art of making others feel responsible 
and even indebted to them, without cause. Satanism observes these leeches in their true 
light. Psychic vampires are individuals who drain others of their vital energy. This type 
of person can be found in all avenues of society. They fill no useful purpose in our 
lives, and are neither love objects nor true friends. Yet we feel responsible to the 
psychic vampire without knowing why. 

If you think you may be the victim of such a person, there are a few simple rules which will 
help you form a decision. Is there a person you often call or visit, even though you really don't 
want to, because you know you will feel guilty if you don't? Or, do you find yourself 
constantiy doing favors for one who doesn't come forward and ask, but hints? Often the 
psychic vampire will use reverse psychology, saying: "Oh, I couldn't ask you to do that" - and 
you, in turn, insist upon doing it. The psychic vampire never demands anything of you. That 
would be far too presumptuous. They simply let their wishes be known in subtie ways which 
will prevent them from being considered pests. They "wouldn't think of imposing" and are 
always content and willingly accept their lot, without the slightest complaint - outwardly! 

Their sins are not of commission, but of omission. It's what they don 't say, not what they do 
say, that makes you feel you must account to them. They are much too crafty to make overt 
demands upon you, because they know you would resent it, and would have a tangible and 
legitimate reason for denying them. 

A large percentage of these people have special "attributes" which make their dependence 
upon you more feasible and much more effective. Many psychic vampires are invalids (or 
pretend to be) or are "mentally or emotionally disturbed." Others might feign ignorance or 
incompetence so you will, out of pity - or more often, exasperation - do things for them. 

The traditional way to banish a demon or elemental is to recognize it for what it is, and 
exorcise it. Recognition of these modem- day demons and their methods is the only antidote 
for their devastating hold over you. 

Most people accept these passively vicious individuals at face value only because their 
insidious maneuvers have never been pointed out to them. They merely accept these "poor 
souls" as being less fortunate than themselves, and feel they must help them however they 
can. It is this misdirected sense of responsibility (or unfounded sense of guilt) which 
nourishes well the "altruisms" upon which these parasites feast! 

The psychic vampire is allowed to exist because he cleverly chooses conscientious, 
responsible people for his victims - people with great dedication to their "moral obligations." 

In some cases we are vampirized by groups of people, as well as individuals. Every fund 
raising organization, be it a charitable foundation, community council, religious or fraternal 
association, etc., carefully selects a person who is adept at making others feel guilty for its 




chairman or coordinator. It is the job of this chairman to intimidate us into opening first our 
hearts, and then our wallets, to the recipient of their "good will" - never mentioning that, in 
many cases, their time is not unselfishly donated, but that they are drawing a fat salary for 
their "noble deeds." They are masters at playing upon the sympathy and consideration of 
responsible people. How often we see little children who have been sent forth by these self- 
righteous Fagins to painlessly extract donations from the kindly. Who can resist the innocent 
charm of a child? 

There are, of course, people who are not happy unless they are giving, but many of us do not 
fit into this category. Unfortunately, we are often put upon to do things we do not genuinely 
feel should be required of us. A conscientious person finds it very difficult to decide between 
voluntary and imposed charity. He wants to do what is right and just, and finds it perplexing 
trying to decide exactly who he should help and what degree of aid should rightfully be 
expected of him. 

Each person must decide for himself what his obhgations are to his respective friends, family, 
and community. Before donating his time and money to those outside his immediate family 
and close circle of friends, he must decide what he can afford, without depriving those closest 
to him. When taking these things into consideration he must be certain to include himself 
among those who mean most to him. He must carefully evaluate the validity of the request 
and the personality or motives of the person asking it of him. 

It is extremely difficult for a person to learn to say "no" when all his life he has said "yes." 
But unless he wants to be constantly taken advantage of, he must learn to say "no" when 
circumstances justify doing so. If you allow them, psychic vampires will gradually infiltrate 
your everyday life until you have no privacy left - and your constant feeling of concern for 
them will deplete you of all ambition. 

A psychic vampire will always select a person who is relatively content and satisfied with his 
life - a person who is happily married, pleased with his job, and generally well-adjusted to the 
world around him - to feed upon. The very fact that the psychic vampire chooses to victimize 
a happy person shows that he is lacking all the things his victim has; he will do everything he 
can to stir up trouble and disharmony between his victim and those people he holds dear. 

Therefore, be wary of anyone who seems to have no real friends and no apparant interest in 
life (except you). He will usually tell you he is very selective in his choice of friends, or 
doesn't make friends easily because of the high standards he sets for his companions. (To 
acquire and keep friends, one must be willing to give of himself - something of which the 
psychic vampire is incapable.) But he will hasten to add that you fulfill every requirement and 
are truly an outstanding exception among men - you are one of the very few worthy of his 
friendship. 

Lest you confuse desperate love (which is a very selfish thing) with psychic vampirism, the 
vast difference between the two must be clarified. The only way to determine if you are being 
vampirized is to weigh what you give the person compared to what they give you in return. 

You may, at times, become annoyed with the obhgations put upon you by a loved one, a close 
friend, or even an employer. But before you label them psychic vampires, you must ask 
yourself, "What am I getting in return?" If your spouse or lover insists that you call them 
frequentiy, but you also require them to account to you for their time spent away from you, 
you must realize this is a give and take situation. Or, if a friend is in the habit of calling upon 



you for help at inopportune moments, but you similarly depend upon them to give your 
immediate needs priority, you must regard it as a fair exchange. If your employer asks you to 
do a little more than is normally expected of you in your particular position, but will overlook 
occasional tardiness or will give you time off when you need it, you certainly have no cause 
for complaint and need not feel he is taking advantage of you. 

You are, however, being vampirized if you are incessantly called upon or expected to do 
favors for someone who, when you need a favor, always happens to have other "pressing 
obligations." 

Many psychic vampires will give you material things for the express purpose of making you 
feel you owe them something in return, thereby binding you to them. The difference between 
your giving, and theirs, is that your return payment must come in a non- material form. They 
want you to feel obligated to them, and would be very disappointed and even resentful if you 
attempted to repay them with material objects. In essence, you have "sold your soul" to them, 
and they'll constantly remind you of your duty to them, by not reminding you. 

Being purely Satanic, the only way to deal with a psychic vampire is to "play dumb" and act 
as though they are genuinely altruistic and really expect nothing in return. Teach them a 
lesson by graciously taking what they give you, thanking them loudly enough for all to hear, 
and walking away! In this way you come out the victor. What can they say? And when you 
are inevitably expected to repay their "generosity," (this is the hard part!) you say "no" - but 
again, graciously! When they feel you falling from their clutches two things will happen. 
First, they will act "crushed," hoping your old feeling of duty and sympathy will return, and 
when (and if) it doesn't, they will show their true colors and will become angry and 
vindictive. 

Once you have moved them to this point, you can play the role of the injured party. After all, 
you've done nothing wrong - you just happened to have had "pressing obligations" when they 
needed you, and since nothing was expected in return for their gifts, there should be no hard 
feelings. 

Generally, the psychic vampire will realize his methods have been discovered and will not 
press the issue. He will not continue to waste his time with you, but will move on to his next 
unsuspecting victim. 

There are times, however, when the psychic vampire will not release his hold so easily, and 
will do everything possible to torment you. They have plenty of time for this because, when 
once rejected, they will neglect all else (what little else they have, that is) to devote their every 
waking moment to planning the revenge to which they feel they are entitled. For this reason, it 
is best to avoid a relationship with this kind of person in the first place. Their "adulation" and 
dependence upon you may, at first, be very flattering, and their material gifts very attractive, 
but you will eventually find yourself paying for them many times over. 

Don't waste your time with people who will ultimately destroy you, but concentrate instead on 
those who will appreciate your responsibility to them, and, likewise, feel responsible to you. 

And if you are a psychic vampire - take heed! Beware of the Satanist - he is ready and willing 
to gleefully drive the proverbial stake through your heart! 



INDULGENCE . . . NOT COMPULSION 



THE HIGHEST PLATEAU OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
IS THE AWARENESS OF THE FLESh! 



fljf Satanism encourages its followers to indulge in their natural desires. Only by doing so 

^Bjt^can you be a completely satisfied person with no frustrations which can be harmful to 
Jm yourself and others around you. Therefore, the most simplified description of the 
£ Satanic belief is: 

\ INDULGENCE INSTEAD OF ABSTINENCE 

People often mistake compulsion for indulgence, but there is a world of difference 
between the two. A compulsion is never created by indulging, but by not being able to 
indulge. By making something taboo, it only serves to intensify the desire. Everyone likes to 
do the things they have been told not to. "Forbidden fruits are sweetest." 

Webster's Encyclopedic Dictionary defines indulgence thusly: "To give oneself up to; not to 
restrain or oppose; to give free course to; to gratify by compliance; to yield to." The 
dictionary definition of compulsion is: "The act of compelling or driving by a force, physical 
or moral; constraint of the will; (compulsory, obligatory)." In other words, indulgence implies 
choice, whereas compulsion indicates the lack of choice. 

When a person has no proper release for his desires they rapidly build up and become 
compulsions. If everyone had a particular time and place for the purpose of periodically 
indulging in their personal desires, without fear of embarrassment or reproach, they would be 
sufficiently released to lead unfrustrated lives in the everyday world. They would be free to 
plunge headlong into whatever undertaking they might choose instead of going about their 
duties half-heartedly, their creative urges frustrated by denying their natural desires. This 
would apply in the majority of cases, but there will always be those who work better under 
pressure. 

Generally, those who need to endure a certain amount of hardship to produce to their full 
capabilities are in basically artistic vocations. (More will be said later about fulfillment 
through self-denial.) This does not mean to imply that all artists fit into this category. On the 
contrary, many artists are unable to produce unless their basic animal needs have been 
satisfied. 

For the most part, it is not the artist or individualist, but the average middle-class working 
man or woman who is lacking the proper release for their desires. It is ironic that the 
responsible, respectable person - the one who pays society's bills - should be the one given the 
least in return. It is he who must be ever conscious of his "moral obhgations", and who is 
condemned for normally indulging in his natural desires. 

The Satanic religion considers this a gross injustice. He who upholds his responsibilities 
should be most entitied to the pleasures of his choice, without censure from the society he 
serves. 

Finally a religion (Satanism) has been formed which commends and rewards those who 
support the society in which they live, instead of denouncing them for their human needs. 



From every set of principles (be it religious, political, or philosophical), some good can be 
extracted. Amidst the madness of the Hitlerian concept, one point stands out as a shining 
example of this - "strength through joy!". Hitier was no fool when he offered the German 
people happiness, on a personal level, to insure their loyalty to him, and peak efficiency from 
them. 

It has been clearly established that the majority of all illnesses are of a psychosomatic nature, 
and that psychosomatic illnesses are a direct result of frustration. It has been said that "the 
good die young". The good, by Christian standards, do die young. It is the frustration of our 
natural instincts which leads to the deterioration of our minds and bodies. 

It has become very fashionable to concentrate on the betterment of the mind and spirit, and to 
consider giving pleasure to one's body (the very shell without which the mind and spirit could 
not exist) to be coarse, crude, unrefined, as of late, most people who deem themselves emancipated 
have left normalcy only to "transcend" into idiocy! By way of bending their behinds around to 
meet their navels, subsisting on wild and exotic diets like brown rice and tea, they feel they 
will arrive at a great state of spiritual development. 

"Hogwash!" says the Satanist. He would rather eat a good hearty meal, exercise his 
imagination, and transcend by means of physical and emotional fulfillment. It seems, to the 
Satanist, that after being harnessed with unreasonable religious demands for so many 
centuries, one would welcome the chance to be human for once! 

If anyone thinks that by denying his natural desires he can avoid mediocrity, he should 
examine the Eastern mystical beliefs which have been in great intellectual favor in recent 
years. Christianity is "old-hat", so those who wish to escape its fetters have turned to so-called 
enlightened rehgions, such as Buddhism. Although Christianity is certainly deserving of the 
criticism it has received, perhaps it has been taking more than its share of the blame. The 
followers of the mystical beliefs are every bit as guilty of the little humanisms as the 
"misguided" Christians. Both rehgions are based on trite philosophies, but the mystical 
religionists profess to be enlightened and emancipated from the guilt-ridden dogma which is 
typified by Christianity. However, the Eastern mystic is even more preoccupied than the 
Christian with avoiding animahstic actions that remind him he is not a "saint", but merely a 
man - only another form of animal, sometimes better, more often worse, than those who walk 
on all fours; and who, because of his "divine spiritual and intellectual development", has 
become the most vicious animal of all! 

The Satanist asks, "What is wrong with being human, and having human limitations as well as 
assets?" By denying his desires the mystic has come no closer to overcoming compulsion than 
his kindred soul, the Christian. The Eastern mystical beliefs have taught people to 
contemplate their navels, stand on their heads, stare at blank walls, avoid the use of labels in 
life, and discipline themselves against any desire for materialistic pleasure. Nevertheless, I am 
sure you have seen just as many so-called disciplined yogis with the inability to control a 
smoking habit as anyone else; or just as many supposedly emancipated Buddhists become just 
as excited as a "less aware" person when they are confronted with a member of the opposite - 
or in some cases, the same - sex. Yet when asked to explain the reason for their hypocrisy, 
these people retreat into the ambiguousness which characterizes their faith - no one can pin 
them down if there are no straight answers that can be given! 

The simple fact of the matter is that the very thing which has led this type of person to a faith 
which preaches abstinence, is indulgence. Their compulsive masochism is the reason for 



choosing a religion which not only advocates self-denial, but praises them for it; and gives 
them a sacrosanct avenue of expression for their masochistic needs. The more abuse they can 
stand, the holier they become. 

Masochism, to most people, represents a rejection of indulgence. Satanism points out many 
meanings behind the meanings, and considers masochism to be an indulgence if any attempt 
to sway or change the person from his masochistic traits is met with resentment and/or failure. 
The Satanist does not condemn these people for giving vent to their masochistic desires, but 
he does feel the utmost contempt towards those who cannot be honest enough (at least with 
themselves) to face and accept their masochism as a natural part of their personality make-up. 

Having to use religion as an excuse for their masochism is bad enough, but these people 
actually have the effrontery to feel superior to those who are not bound- up in self- deceitful 
expression of their fetishes! These people would be the first to condemn a man who found his 
weekly release with a person who would beat him soundly, thereby releasing himself from the 
very thing which could, if unreleased, make him - as they are - a compulsive church-goer or 
religious fanatic. By finding adequate release for his masochistic desires, he no longer needs 
to debase and deny himself in his every waking moment, as do these compulsive masochists. 

Satanists are encouraged to indulge in the seven deadly sins, as they need hurt no one; they 
were only invented by the Christian Church to insure guilt on the part of its followers. The 
Christian Church knows that it is impossible for anyone to avoid committing these sins, as 
they are all things which we, being human, most naturally do. After inevitably committing 
these sins financial offerings to the church in order to "pay off God are employed as a sop to 
the parishioner's conscience! 

Satan has never needed a book of rules, because vital natural forces have kept man "sinful" 
and intent on preserving himself and his feelings. Nevertheless, demoralizing attempts have 
been made on his body and being for his "soul's" sake, which only illustrate how 
misconceived and misused the labels of "indulgence" versus "compulsion" have become. 

Sexual activity certainly is condoned and encouraged by Satanism, but obviously the fact that 
it is the only religion which honestly takes this stand, is the reason it has been traditionally 
given so much literary space. 

Naturally, if most people belong to the religions which repress them sexually, anything 
written on this provocative subject is going to make for titillating reading. 

If all attempts to sell something (be it a product or an idea) have failed - sex will always sell 
it. The reason for this is that even though people now consciously accept sex as a normal and 
necessary function, their subconscious is still bound by the taboo which religion has placed 
upon it. So, again, what is denied is more intensely desired. It is this bugaboo regarding sex 
which causes the literature devoted to the Satanic views on the subject to overshadow all else 
written about Satanism. 

The true Satanist is not mastered by sex any more than he is mastered by any of his other 
desires. As with all other pleasurable things, the Satanist is master of, rather than mastered by 
sex. He is not the perverted fiend who is just waiting for the opportunity to deflower every 
young virgin, nor is he the skulking degenerate who furtively hangs around in the "dirty" 
bookstores, slavering over the "nasty" pictures. If pornography fills his needs for the moment, 
he unashamedly buys some "choice items" and guiltlessly peruses them at his leisure. 



"We have to accept the fact that man has become disgruntled at being constantly repressed, 
but we must do everything we can to at least temper the sinful desires of man, lest they run 
rampant in this new age," say the rehgionists of the right-hand path to the questioning 
Satanist. "Why continue to think of these desires as shameful and something to be repressed, 
if you now admit they are natural?" returns the Satanist. Could it be that the white- light 
rehgionists are a bit "sour- grapes" about the fact that they didn't think of a religion, before the 
Satanists, which would be enjoyable to follow; and if the truth were known, would they too 
not like to have a bit more pleasure out of life, but for fear of losing face, cannot admit it? 
Could it also be that they are afraid people will, after hearing about Satanism, tell themselves 
"This is for me - why should I continue with a religion which condemns me for everything I 
do, even though there is nothing actually wrong with it?" The Satanist thinks this is more than 
likely true. 

There is certainly much evidence that past religions are, every day, lifting more and more of 
their ridiculous restrictions. Even so, when an entire religion is based on abstinence instead of 
indulgence (as it should be) there is lMe left when it has been revised to meet the current 
needs of man. So, why waste time "buying oats for a dead horse"? 

The watchword of Satanism is indulgence instead of "abstinence" . . . but - it is not 
"compulsion". 



ON THE CHOICE 
OF 

A HUMAN SACRIFICE 

JFK 

jfja Thu supposed puipose in performing the ritual of sacrifice is to throw the energy 

^■jfprovided by the blood of the freshly slaughtered victim into the atmosphere of the 
Jm magical working, thereby intensifying the magician's chances of success. 

W The "white" magician assumes that since blood represents the life force, there is no 
\ better way to appease the gods or demons than to present them with suitable quantities 
J of it. Combine this rationale with the fact that a dying creature is expending an 
overabundance of adrenal and other biochemical energies, and you have what appears 
to be an unbeatable combination. 

The "white" magician, wary of the consequences involved in the killing of a human being, 
naturally utilizes birds, or other "lower" creatures in his ceremonies. It seems these 
sanctimonious wretches feel no guilt in the taking of a non- human life, as opposed to a 
human's. 

The fact of the matter is that if the "magician" is worthy of his name, he will be uninhibited 
enough to release the necessary force from his own body, instead of from an unwilling and 
undeserving victim! 

Contrary to all established magical theory, the release of this force is not effected in the actual 
spilling of blood, but in the death throes of the living creature! This discharge of bioelectrical 
energy is the very same phenomenon which occurs during any profound heightening of the 
emotions, such as: sexual orgasm, blind anger, mortal terror, consuming grief, etc. Of these 
emotions, the easiest entered into of one's own violation are sexual orgasm and anger, with 
grief mnning a close third. Remembering that the two most readily available of these three 
(sexual orgasm and anger) have been burned into man's unconscious as "sinful" by religionists, 
it is small wonder they are shunned by the "white" magician, who plods along carrying the 
greatest of all millstones of guilt! 

The inhibitive and asinine absurdity in the need to kill an innocent living creature at the high- 
point of a ritual, as practiced by erstwhile "wizards", is obviously their "lesser of the evils" 
when a discharge of energy is called for. These poor conscience- stricken fools, who have 
been calling themselves witches and warlocks, would sooner chop the head off a goat or 
chicken in an attempt to harness its death agony, than have the "blasphemous" bravery to 
masturbate in full view of the Jehovah whom they claim to deny! The only way these mystical 
cowards can ritualistically release themselves is through the agony of another's death (actually 
their own, by proxy) rather than the indulgent force which produces life! The treaders of the 
path of white light are truly the cold and the dead! No wonder these tittering pustules of 
"mystical wisdom" must stand within protective circles to bind the "evil" forces in order to 
keep themselves "safe" from attack - one good orgasm would probably kill them! 

The use of a human sacrifice in a Satanic ritual does not imply that the sacrifice is slaughtered 
"to appease the gods". Symbolically, the victim is destroyed through the working of a hex or 
curse, which in turn leads to the physical, mental or emotional destmction of the "sacrifice" in 
ways and means not attributable to the magician. 



The only time a Satanist would perform a human sacrifice would be if it were to serve a two- 
fold purpose; that being to release the magician's wrath in the throwing of a curse, and more 
important, to dispose of a totally obnoxious and deserving individual. 

Under no circumstances would a Satanist sacrifice any animal or baby! For centuries, 
propagandists of the right-hand path have been prattling over the supposed sacrifices of small 
children and voluptuous maidens at the hands of diabolists. It would be thought that anyone 
reading or hearing of these heinous accounts would immediately question their authenticity, 
taking into consideration the biased sources of the stories. On the contrary, as with all "holy" 
lies which are accepted without reservation, this assumed modus operandi of the Satanists 
persists to this day! 

There are sound and logical reasons why the Satanists could not perform such sacrifices. Man, 
the animal, is the godhead to the Satanist. The purest form of carnal existence reposes in the 
bodies of animals and human children who have not grown old enough to deny themselves 
their natural desires. They can perceive things that the average adult human can never hope to. 
Therefore, the Satanist holds these beings in a sacred regard, knowing he can learn much from 
these natural magicians of the world. 

The Satanist is aware of the universal custom of the treader of the path of Agarthi; the killing 
of the god. Inasmuch as gods are always created in man's own image - and the average man 
hates what he sees in himself - the inevitable must occur: the sacrifice of the god who 
represents himself. The Satanist does not hate himself, nor the gods he might choose, and has 
no desire to destroy himself or anything for which he stands ! It is for this reason he could 
never willfully harm an animal or child. 

The question arises, "Who, then, would be considered a fit and proper human sacrifice, and 
how is one qualified to pass judgment on such a person?" The answer is brutally simple. 
Anyone who has unjustiy wronged you - one who has "gone out of his way" to hurt you - to 
deliberately cause trouble and hardship for you or those dear to you. In short, a person asking 
to be cursed by their very actions. 

When a person, by his reprehensible behavior, practically cries out to be destroyed, it is truly 
your moral obligation to indulge them their wish. The person who takes every opportunity to 
"pick on" others is often mistakenly called "sadistic". In reality, this person is a misdirected 
masochist who is working towards his own destruction. The reason a person viciously strikes 
out against you is because they are afraid of you or what you represent, or are resentful of 
your happiness. They are weak, insecure, and on extremely shaky ground when you throw 
your curse, and they make ideal human sacrifices. 

It is sometimes easy to overlook the actual wrongdoing of the victim of your curse, when one 
considers how "unhappy" a person he really is. It is not so easy, though, to retrace the 
damaging footsteps of your antagonist and make right those practical situations he or she has 
made wrong. 

The "ideal sacrifice" may be emotionally insecure, but nonetheless can, in the machinations of 
his insecurity, cause severe damage to your tranquility or sound reputation. "Mental illness", 
"nervous breakdown", "maladjustment", "anxiety neuroses", "broken homes", "sibling 
rivalry", etc., etc., ad infinitum have too long been convenient excuses for vicious and 
irresponsible actions. Anyone who says "we must try to understand" those who make life 
miserable for those undeserving of misery is aiding and abetting a social cancer! The 



apologists for these rabid humans deserve any clobberings they get at the hands of their 
charges! 

Mad dogs are destroyed, and they need help far more than the human who convenientiy made 
froths at the mouth when irrational behavior is in order! It is easy to say, "So what! - these 
people are insecure, so they can't hurt me." But the fact remains - given the opportunity they 
would destroy you! 

Therefore, you have every right to (symbolically) destroy them, and if your curse provokes 

their actual annihilation, rejoice that you have been instrumental in ridding the world of a 

pest! If your success or happiness disturbs a person - you owe him nothing! He is made to be 

trampled under foot! if people had to take the consequences of their own actions, they would think 

twice! 



LIFE AFTER DEATH 
THROUGH FULFILLMENT 
OF THE EGO 




M an is aware that he will die, someday. Other animals, when nearing death, know 

they are about to die; but it is not until death is certain that the animal senses his 
corning departure from this world. And even then he does not know exactiy what is 
entailed in dying. It is often pointed out that animals accept death gracefully, without 
fear or resistance. This is a beautiful concept, but one that only holds true in cases 
where death for the animal is unavoidable. 

When an animal is sick or injured he will fight for his life with every ounce of strength 
he has left. It is this unshakable will to live that, if man were not so "highly evolved", would 
also give him the fighting spirit he needs to stay alive. 

It is a well known fact that many people die simply because they give up and just don't care 
anymore. This is understandable if the person is very ill, with no apparent chance for 
recovery. But this often is not the case. Man has become lazy. He has learned to take the easy 
way out. Even suicide has become less repugnant to many people than any number of other 
sins. Religion is totally to blame for this. 

Death, in most religions, is touted as a great spiritual awakening - one which is prepared for 
throughout life. This concept is very appealing to one who has not had a satisfactory life; but 
to those who have experienced all the joys life has to offer, there is a great dread attached to 
dying. This is as it should be. It is this lust for life which will allow the vital person to live on 
after the inevitable death of his fleshly shell. 

History shows that men who have given their own lives in pursuit of an ideal have been 
deified for their martyrdom. Religionists and political leaders have been very crafty in laying 
their plans. By holding the martyr up as a shining example to his fellow men, they eliminate 
the common sense reaction that willful self-destruction goes against all animal logic. To the 
Satanist, martyrdom and non- personalized heroism is to be associated not with integrity, but 
with stupidity. This, of course, does not apply to the situations which involve the safety of a 
loved one. But to give one's own life for something as impersonal as a political or religious 
issue is the ultimate in masochism. 

Life is the one great indulgence; death the one great abstinence. To a person who is satisfied 
with his earthly existence, life is like a party; and no one likes to leave a good party. By the 
same token, if a person is enjoying himself here on earth he will not so readily give up this 
life for the promise of an afterlife about which he knows nothing. 

The Eastern mystical beliefs teach humans to discipline themselves against any conscious will 
for success so they might dissolve themselves into "Universal Cosmic Awareness" - anything 
to avoid good healthy self-satisfaction or honest pride in earthly accomplishments! 

It is interesting to note that the areas in which this type of belief flourishes are those where 
material gains are not easily obtainable. For this reason the predominant religious belief must 
be one which commends its followers for their rejection of material things and their avoidance 
of the use of labels which attaches a certain amount of importance to material gains. In this 




way the people can be pacified into accepting their lot, no matter how small it may be. 

Satanism uses many labels. If it were not for names, very few of us would understand 
anything in life, much less attach any significance to it; - and significance compels 
recognition, which is something everyone wants, especially the Eastern mystic who tries to 
prove to everyone he can meditate longer or stand more deprivation and pain than the next 
fellow. 

The Eastern philosophies preach the dissolution of man's ego before he can produce sins. It is 
unfathomable to the Satanist to conceive of an ego which would willfully choose denial of 
itself. 

In countries where this is used as a sop for the willingly impoverished, it is understandable 
that a philosophy which teaches the denial of the ego would serve a useful purpose - at least 
for those in power, to whom it would be detrimental if their people were discontented. But for 
anyone who has every opportunity for material gain, to choose this form of religious thought 
seems foolish, indeed! 

The Eastern mystic believes strongly in reincarnation. To a person who has virtually nothing 
in this life, the possibility that he may have been a king in a past life or may be one in the next 
life is very attractive, and does much to appease his need for self-respect. If there is nothing in 
which they can take pride in this life, they can console themselves by thinking, "there are 
always future lives." It never occurs to the believer in reincarnation that if his father, 
grandfather, and great-grandfather, etc. had developed "good karmas", by their adherence to 
the same beliefs and ethics as his present ones - then why is he now living in privation, rather 
than like a maharajah? 

Belief in reincarnation provides a beautiful fantasy world in which a person can find the 
proper avenue of ego-expression, but at the same time claim to have dissolved his ego. This is 
emphasized by the roles people choose for themselves in their past or future lives. 

Believers in reincarnation do not always choose an honorable character. If the person is of a 
highly respectable and conservative nature, he will often choose a colorful rogue or gangster, 
thereby fulfilling his alter- ego. Or, a woman who has much social status may pick a harlot or 
famous courtesan for the characterization of herself in a past life. 

If people were able to divorce themselves from the stigma attached to personal ego- 
fulfillment, they would not need to play self- deceitful games such as belief in reincarnation as 
a means of satisfying their natural need for ego -fulfillment. 

The Satanist believes in complete gratification of his ego. Satanism, in fact, is the only 
religion which advocates the intensification or encouragement of the ego. Only if a person's 
own ego is sufficiency fulfilled, can he afford to be kind and complimentary to others, 
without robbing himself of his self-respect. We generally think of a braggart as a person with 
a large ego; in reality, his bragging results from a need to satisfy his impoverished ego. 

Religionists have kept their followers in line by suppressing their egos. By making their 
followers feel inferior, the awesomeness of their god is insured. Satanism encourages its 
members to develop a good strong ego because it gives them the self-respect necessary for a 
vital existence in this life. 



If a person has been vital throughout his life and has fought to the end for his earthly 
existence, it is this ego which will refuse to die, even after the expiration of the flesh which 
housed it. Young children are to be admired for their driving enthusiasm for life. This is 
exemplified by the small child who refuses to go to bed when there is something exciting 
going on, and when once put to bed, will sneak down the stairs to peek through the curtain 
and watch. It is this child- like vitality that will allow the Satanist to peek through the curtain 
of darkness and death and remain earthbound. 

Self-sacrifice is not encouraged by the Satanic religion. Therefore, unless death comes as an 
indulgence because of extreme circumstances which make the termination of life a welcome 
relief from the unendurable earthly existence, suicide is frowned upon by the Satanic religion. 

Religious martyrs have taken their own lives, not because life was intolerable for them, but to 
use their supreme sacrifice as a tool to further the religious belief. We must assume, then, that 
suicide, if done for the sake of the church, is condoned and even encouraged - even though 
their scriptures label it a sin - because religious martyrs of the past have always been deified. 

It is rather curious that the only time suicide is considered sinful by other religions is when it 
comes as an indulgence. 



RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS 



JSl The highest of all hohdays in the Satanic rehgion is the date of one's own birth. This 

^■fe^is in direct contradiction to the holy of holy days of other religions, which deify a 
Jm particular god who has been created in an anthropomorphic form of their own image, 
£ thereby showing that the ego is not really buried. 

\ The Satanist feels: "Why not really be honest and if you are going to create a god in 
J your image, why not create that god as yourself." Every man is a god if he chooses to 
recognize himself as one. So, the Satanist celebrates his own birthday as the most 
important holiday of the year. After all, aren't you happier about the fact that you were bom 
than you are about the birth of someone you have never even met? Or for that matter, aside 
from religious hohdays, why pay higher tribute to the birthday of a president or to a date in 
history than we do to the day we were brought into this greatest of all worlds? 

Despite the fact that some of us may not have been wanted, or at least were not particularly 
planned, we're glad, even if no one else is, that we're here! You should give yourself a pat on 
the back, buy yourself whatever you want, treat yourself like the king (or god) that you are, 
and generally celebrate your birthday with as much pomp and ceremony as possible. 

After one's own birthday, the two major Satanic holidays are Walpurgisnacht and Halloween 
(or All Hallows' Eve). 

St. Walpurgis - or Walpurga, or Walburga, depending upon the time and area in which one is 
referring to her - was bom in Sussex about the end of the Seventh or the beginning of the 
Eighth Century, and was educated at Winburn, Dorset, where after taking the veil, she 
remained for twenty- five years. She then, at the instance of her uncle, St. Boniface, and her 
brother, St. Wilibald, set out along with some other nuns to found religious houses in 
Germany. Her first settlement was at Bischofsheim in the diocese of Mainz, and two years 
later (754 A.D.) she became abbess of the Benedictine nunnery at Heidenheim, within her 
brother Wilibald's diocese of Eichstadt in Bavaria, where another brother, Winebald, had at 
the same time also been made head of a monastery. On the death of Winebald in 760 she 
succeeded him in his charge, retaining the superintendence of both houses until her death on 
February 25, 779. Her relics were translated to Eichstadt, where she was laid in a hollow rock, 
from which exuded a kind of bituminous oil, afterwards known as Walpurgis oil, regarded as 
having miraculous efficacy against disease. The cave became a place of pilgrimage, and a 
great church was built over the spot. She is commemorated at various times, but principally 
on May 1st, her day taking the place of an earlier Pagan festival. Amazingly enough, all of 
this rigmarole was found necessary simply to condone the continuance of the most important 
Pagan festival of the year - the grand climax of the spring equinox! 

The Eve of May has been memorialized as the night that all of the demons, specters, afreets, 
and banshees would come forth and hold their wild revels, symbolizing the fruition of the 
spring equinox. 

Halloween - All Hallows' Eve, or All Saints' Day - falls on October 31st or November 1st. 
Originally, All Hallows' Eve was one of the great fire festivals of Britain at the time of the 
Druids. In Scotland it was associated with the time when the spirits of the dead, the demons, 
witches, and sorcerers were unusually active and propitious. Paradoxically, All Hallows' Eve 



was also the night when young people performed magical rituals to determine their future 
marriage partners. The youth of the villages carried on with much merry-making and sensual 
revelry, but the older people took great care to safeguard their homes from the evil spirits, 
witches, and demons who had exceptional power that night. 

The solstices and equinoxes are also celebrated as holidays, as they herald the first day of the 
seasons. The difference between a solstice and an equinox is a semantic one defining the 
relationship between the sun, moon, and the fixed stars. The solstice applies to summer and 
winter; the equinox refers to autumn and spring. The summer solstice is in June, and the 
winter solstice is in December. The autumn equinox is in September, and the spring equinox 
is in March. Both the equinoxes and the solstices vary a day or two from year to year, 
depending on the lunar cycle at the time, but usually fall on the 21st or 22nd of the month. 
Five to six weeks after these days the legendary Satanic revels are celebrated. 



THE BLACK MASS 




N o other single device has been associated with Satanism as much as the black mass. 

To say that the most blasphemous of all religious ceremonies is nothing more than a 
literary invention is certainly a statement which needs qualifying - but nothing could 
be truer. 

The popular concept of the black mass is thus: a defrocked priest stands before an altar 
consisting of a nude woman, her legs spread-eagled and vagina thrust open, each of her 
outstretched fists grasping a black candle made from the fat of unbaptized babies, and 
a chalice containing the urine of a prostitute (or blood) reposing on her belly. An inverted 
cross hangs above the altar, and triangular hosts of ergot- laden bread or black- stained turnip 
are methodically blessed as the priest dutifully slips them in and out of the altar- lady's labia. 
Then, we are told, an invocation to Satan and various demons is followed by an array of 
prayers and psalms chanted backwards or interspersed with obscenities ... all performed 
within the confines of a "protective" pentagram drawn on the floor. If the Devil appears he is 
invariably in the form of a rather eager man wearing the head of a black goat upon his 
shoulders. Then follows a potpourri of flagellation, prayer-book burning, cunnilingus, fellatio, 
and general hindquarters kissing - all done to a background of ribald recitations from the Holy 
Bible, and audible expectorations on the cross! If a baby can be slaughtered during the ritual, 
so much the better; for as everyone knows, this is the favorite sport of the Satanist! 

If this sounds repugnant, then the success of the reports of the black mass, in keeping the 
devout in church, is easy to understand. No "decent" person could fail to side with the 
inquisitors when told of these blasphemies. The propagandists of the church did their job well, 
mforrning the public at one time or another of the heresies and heinous acts of the Pagans, 
Cathars, Bogomils, Templars and others who, because of their dualistic philosophies and 
sometimes Satanic logic, had to be eradicated. 

The stories of unbaptized babies being stolen by Satanists for use in the mass were not only 
effective propaganda measures, but also provided a constant source of revenue for the 
Church, in the form of baptism fees. No Christian mother would, upon hearing of these 
diabolical kidnappings, refrain from getting her child properly baptized, post haste. 

Another facet of man's nature was apparent in the fact that the writer or artist with lewd 
thoughts could exercise his most obscene predilections in the portrayal of the activities of 
heretics. The censor who views all pornography so that he will know what to warn others of is 
the modem equivalent of the medieval chronicler of the obscene deeds of the Satanists (and, 
of course, their modem journalistic counterparts). It is believed that the most complete library 
of pornography in the world is owned by the Vatican! 

The kissing of the Devil's behind during the traditional black mass is easily recognized as the 
forerunner of the modem term used to describe one who will, through appealing to another's 
ego, gain materially from him. As all Satanic ceremonies were performed toward very real or 
material goals, the oscularum infame (or kiss of shame) was considered a symbolic requisite 
towards earthly, rather than spiritual, success. 

The usual assumption is that the Satanic ceremony or service is always called a black mass. A 
black mass is not the magical ceremony practiced by Satanists. The Satanist would only 




employ the use of a black mass as a form of psychodrama. Furthermore, a black mass does 
not necessarily imply that the performers of such are Satanists. A black mass is essentially a 
parody of the religious service of the Roman Catholic Church, but can be loosely applied to a 
satire on any religious ceremony. 

To the Satanist, the black mass, in its blaspheming of orthodox rites, is nothing more than a 
redundancy. The services of all established religions are actually parodies of old rituals 
performed by the worshippers of the earth and the flesh. In attempts to de-sexualize and de- 
humanize the Pagan beliefs, later men of spiritual faith whitewashed the honest meanings 
behind the rituals into the bland euphemisms now considered to be the "true mass". Even if 
the Satanist were to spend each night performing a black mass, he would no more be 
performing a travesty than the devout churchgoer who unwittingly attends his own "black 
mass" - his spoof on the honest and emotionally- sound rites of Pagan antiquity. 

Any ceremony considered a black mass must effectively shock and outrage, as this seems to 
be the measure of its success. In the Middle Ages, blaspheming the holy church was shocking. 
Now, however, the Church does not present the awesome image it did during the inquisition. 
The traditional black mass is no longer the outrageous spectacle to the dilettante or renegade 
priest that it once was. If the Satanist wishes to create a ritual to blaspheme an accepted 
institution, for the purpose of psychodrama, he is careful to choose one that is not in vogue to 
parody. Thus, he is truly stepping on a sacred cow. 

A black mass, today, would consist of the blaspheming of such "sacred" topics as Eastern 
mysticism, psychiatry, the psychedelic movement, ultra- liberalism, etc. Patriotism would be 
championed, drugs and their gurus would be defiled, acultural militants would be deified, and 
the decadence of ecclesiastical theologies might even be given a Satanic boost. 

The Satanic magus has always been the catalyst for the dichotomy necessary in molding 
popular beliefs, and in this case a ceremony in the nature of a black mass may serve a far- 
reaching magical purpose. 

In the year 1666, some rather interesting events occurred in France. With the death of 
Francois Mansart, the architect of the trapezoid, whose geometries were to become the 
prototype of the haunted house, the Palace of Versailles was being constructed, in accordance 
with his plans. The last of the glamorous priestesses of Satan, Jeanne -Marie Bouvier 
(Madame Guyon) was to be overshadowed by a shrewd opportunist and callous business- 
woman named Catharine Deshayes, otherwise known as LaVoisin. Here was an erstwhile 
beautician who, while dabbling in abortions and purveying the most efficient poisons to ladies 
desirous of eliminating unwanted husbands or lovers, found in the lurid accounts of the 
"messes noir" a proverbial brainstorm. 

It is safe to say that 1666 was the year of the first "commercial" black mass! In the region 
south of St. Denis, which is now called LaGarenne, a great walled house was purchased by 
LaVoisin and fitted with dispensaries, cells, laboratories, and ... a chapel. Soon it became de 
rigueur for royalty and lesser dilettantes to attend and participate in the very type of service 
mentioned earlier in this chapter. The organized fraud perpetrated in these ceremonies has 
become indelibly marked in history as the "true black mass". 

When LaVoisin was arrested on March 13, 1679 (in the Church of Our Blessed Lady of Good 
Tidings, incidentally), the die had already been cast. The degraded activities of LaVoisin had 
stifled the majesty of Satanism for many years to come. 



The Satanism- for- fan- and- games fad next appeared in England in the middle 18th Century in 
the form of Sir Francis Dashwood's Order of the Medmanham Franciscans, popularly called 
The Hell-Fire Club. While eliminating the blood, gore, and baby- fat candles of the previous 
century's masses, Sir Francis managed to conduct rituals replete with good dirty fun, and 
certainly provided a colorful and harmless form of psychodrama for many of the leading 
lights of the period. An interesting sideline of Sir Francis, which lends a clue to the climate of 
the Hell- Fire Club, was a group called the Dilettanti Club, of which he was the founder. 

It was the 19th Century that brought a whitewashing to Satanism, in the feeble attempts of 
"white" magicians trying to perform "black" magic. This was a very paradoxical period for 
Satanism, with writers such as Baudelaire and Huysmans who, despite their apparent 
obsession with evil, seemed nice enough fellows. The Devil developed his Luciferian 
personality for the public to see, and gradually evolved into a sort of drawing-room 
gentleman. This was the era of "experts" on the black arts, such as Eliphas Levi and countless 
trance- mediums who, with their carefully bound spirits and demons, have also succeeded in 
binding the minds of many who call themselves parapsychologists to this day! 

As far as Satanism is concerned, the closest outward signs of this were the neo- Pagan rites 
conducted by MacGregor Mathers' Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, and Aleister 
Crowley's later Order of the Silver Star (A. . A.'. - Argentinum Astrum) and Order of Oriental 
Templars (O.T.O.)*, which paranoiacally denied any association with Satanism, despite 
Crowley's self-imposed image of the beast of revelation. Aside from some rather charming 
poetry and a smattering of magical bric-a-brac, when not climbing mountains Crowley spent 
most of his time as a poseur par excellence and worked overtime to be wicked. Like his 
contemporary, Rev.(?) Montague Summers, Crowley obviously spent a large part of his life 
with his tongue jammed firmly into his cheek, but his followers, today, are somehow able to 
read esoteric meaning into his every word. 

Perennially concurrent with these societies were the sex clubs using Satanism as a rationale - 
that persists today, for which tabloid newspaper writers may give thanks. 

If it appears that the black mass developed from a literary invention of the church, to a 
depraved commercial actuality, to a psychodrama for dilettantes and iconoclasts, to an ace in 
the hole for popular media . . . then where does it fit into the true nature of Satanism - and 
who was practicing Satanic magic in those years beyond 1666? 

The answer to this riddle lies in another. Is the person generally considered to be a Satanist 
really practicing Satanism in its true sense, or rather from the point of view taken by the 
opinion makers of heavenly persuasion? It has often been said, and rightiy so, that all of the 
books about the Devil have been written by the agents of God. It is, therefore, quite easy to 
understand how a certain breed of devil worshippers was created through the inventions of 
theologians. This erstwhile "evil" character is not necessarily practicing true Satanism. Nor is 
he a living embodiment of the element of untrammeled pride or majesty of self which gave 
the post- Pagan world the churchman's definition of evil. He is instead the by-product of later 
and more elaborate propaganda. 

The pseudo- Satanist has always managed to appear throughout modem history, with his black 
masses of varying degrees of blasphemy; but the real Satanist is not quite so easily recognized 
as such. 

It would be an over- simplification to say that every successful man and woman on earth is, 



without knowing it, a practicing Satanist; but the thirst for earthly success and its ensuing 
realization are certainly grounds for Saint Peter turning thumbs down. If the rich man's entry 
into heaven seems as difficult as the camel's attempt to go through the eye of a needle; if the 
love of money is the root of all evil; then we must at least assume the post powerful men on 
earth to be the most Satanic. This applies to financiers, industrialists, popes, poets, dictators, 
and all assorted opinion- makers and field marshals of the world's activities. 

Occasionally, through "leakages", one of the enigmatic men or women of earth will be found 
to have "dabbled" in the black arts. These, of course, are brought to light as in the "mystery 
men" of history. Names like Rasputin, Zaharoff, Cagliostro, Rosenberg and their ilk are links 
- clues, so to speak, of the true legacy of Satan ... a legacy which transcends ethnic, racial, 
and economic differences and temporal ideologies, as well. The Satanist has always ruled the 
earth . . . and always will, by whatever name he is called. 

One thing stands sure: the standards, philosophy and practices set forth on these pages are 
those employed by the most self- realized and powerful humans on earth. In the secret 
thoughts of each man and woman, still motivated by sound and unclouded minds, resides the 
potential of the Satanist, as always has been. The sign of the horns shall appear to many, now, 
rather than the few; and the magician will stand forth that he may be recognized. 



(EARTH) 



THE BOOK OF BELIAL 

THE MASTERY OF THE EARTH 

The greatest appeal of magic is not in its application, but in its esoteric meanderings. The 
element of mystery which so heavily enshrouds the practice of the black arts has been 
fostered, deliberately or out of ignorance, by those who often claim the highest expertise in 
such matters. If the shortest distance between two points is a straight line, then established 
occultists would do well as maze -makers. The basic principles of ceremonial magic have been 
relegated for so long to infinitely classified bits of scholastic mysticism, that the would-be 
wizard becomes the victim of the very art of misdirection which he, himself, should be 
employing! An analogy may be drawn of the student of applied psychology who, though 
knowing all of the answers, cannot make friends. 

What good is a study of falsehoods, unless everyone believes in falsehoods? Many, of course, 
do believe in falsehoods, but still act according to natural law. It is upon this premise that 
Satanic magic is based. This is a primer - a basic text on materialistic magic. It is a Satanic 
McGuffey's Reader. 

Belial means "without a master", and symbolizes true independence, self-sufficiency, and 
personal accomplishment. Belial represents the earth element, and herein will be found magic 
with both feet on the ground - real, hard-core, magical procedure - not mystical platitudes 
devoid of objective reason. Probe no longer. Here is bedrock! 



THE THEORY AND PRACTICE 
OF 

SATANIC MAGIC 



(Definition and Purpose) 



jfl 1 hii definition of magic, as used in this book, is: 'The change in situations or events 
^flBkin accordance with one's will, which would, using normally accepted methods, be 
W unchangeable." This admittedly leaves a large area for personal interpretation. It will be 
£ said, by some, that these instructions and procedures are nothing more than applied 
W psychology, or scientific fact, called by "magical" terminology - until they arrive at a 
\ passage in the text that is "based on no known scientific finding". It is for this reason 
] that no attempt has been made to limit the explanations set forth to a set nomenclature. 
Magic is never totally scientifically explainable, but science has always been, at one 
time or another, considered magic. 

There is no difference between "White" and "Black" magic, except in the smug hypocrisy, 
guilt- ridden righteousness, and self-deceit of the "White" magician himself. In the classical 
religious tradition, "White" magic is performed for altruistic, benevolent, and "good" 
purposes; while "Black" magic is used for self-aggrandizement, personal power, and "evil" 
purposes. No one on earth ever pursued occult studies, metaphysics, yoga, or any other "white 
light" concept, without ego gratification and personal power as a goal. It just so happens that 
some people enjoy wearing hair shirts, and others prefer velvet or silk. What is pleasure to 
one, is pain to another, and the same applies to "good" and "evil". Every practitioner of 
witchcraft is convinced that he or she is doing the "right" thing. 

Magic falls into two categories, ritual or ceremonial, and non- ritual or manipulative. Ritual 
magic consists of the performance of a formal ceremony, taking place, at least in part, within 
the confines of an area set aside for such purposes and at a specific time. Its main function is 
to isolate the otherwise dissipated adrenal and other emotionally induced energy, and convert 
it into a dynamically transmittable force. It is purely an emotional, rather than intellectual, act. 
Any and all intellectual activity must take place before the ceremony, not during it. This type 
of magic is sometimes known as "greater magic". 

Non- ritual or manipulative magic, sometimes called 'Lesser magic", consists of the wile and 
guile obtained through various devices and contrived situations, which when utilized, can 
create "change, in accordance with one's will". In olden times this would be called 
"fascination", "glamour", or the "evil eye". 

Most of the victims of the witch trials were not witches. Often the victims were eccentric old 
women who were either senile or did not conform to society. Others were exceptionally 
attractive women who turned the heads of the men in power, and were not responsive to their 
advances. The real witches were rarely executed, or even brought to trial, as they were 
proficient in the art of enchantment and could charm the men and save their own lives. Most 
of the real witches were sleeping with the inquisitors. This is the origin of the word 
"glamour". The antiquated meaning of glamour is witchcraft. The most important asset to the 
modem witch is her ability to be alluring, or to utilize glamour. The word "fascination" has a 
similarly occult origin. Fascination was the term applied to the evil eye. To fix a person's 
gaze, in other words, fascinate, was to curse them with the evil eye. Therefore, if a woman 
had the ability to fascinate men, she was regarded as a witch. 



had the ability to fascinate men, she was regarded as a witch. 

Earning to effectively utilize the command to look, is an integral part of a witch's or 
warlock's training. To manipulate a person, you must first be able to attract and hold his 
attention. The three methods by which the command to look can be accomplished are the 
utilization of sex, sentiment, or wonder, or any combination of these. A witch must, honestly, 
decide into which category she most naturally falls. The first category, that of sex, is self- 
evident. If a woman is attractive or sexually appealing, she should do everything in her power 
to make herself as enticing as possible, thereby using sex as her most powerful tool. Once she 
has gained the man's attention, by using her sex appeal, she is free to manipulate him to her 
will. The second category is sentiment. Usually older woman fit into this category. This 
would include the "cookie lady" type witch, who might live in a little cottage, and be thought 
of by people as being a bit eccentric. Children are usually enchanted by the fantasy that this 
type of witch can provide for them, and young adults seek her out for her sage -like advice. 
Through their innocence, children can recognize her magical power. By conforming to an 
image of the sweet little old lady next door, she can employ the art of misdirection to 
accomplish her goals. The third category is the wonder theme. This category would apply to 
the woman who is strange or awesome in her appearance. By making her strange appearance 
work for her, she can manipulate people simply because they are fearful of the consequences 
should they not do as she asks. 

Many women fit into more than one of these categories. For example, the young girl who has 
an appearance of freshness and innocence, but at the same time is very sexy, combines sex 
appeal with sinister overtones, uses sex and wonder. After evaluating her assets, each witch 
must decide into which category or combination of categories she fits, and then utilize these 
assets in their proper form. 

To be a successful warlock, a man must similarly fit himself into the proper category. The 
handsome or sexually appealing man would, naturally, fit into the first category - sex. The 
second, or sentiment category would apply to the older man who has, perhaps, an elfin or 
forest wizard appearance. The sweet old grandpa (often a dirty old man!) would also be in the 
sentiment category. The third type would be the man who presents a sinister or diabolic 
appearance. Each of these men would apply his particular brand of the command to look, in 
much the same way as the women previously described. 

Visual imagery utilized for emotional reaction is certainly the most important device 
incorporated in the practice of lesser magic. Anyone who is foolish enough to say "looks don't 
mean a thing" is indeed deluded. Good looks are unnecessary, but "looks" certainly are 
needed! 

Odor is another important manipulative factor in lesser magic. Remember, animals fear and 
distrust anyone or anything that doesn't smell! And even though we may, as human animals, 
deny many of the judgments based on this sense consciously, we still are motivated by our 
sense of smell just as surely as any all- fours animal. If you are a man, and wish to enchant a 
woman, allow the natural secretions of your body to pervade the atmosphere immediately 
around you, and work in animalistic contrast to the vestments of social politeness that you 
wear upon your back. If you, as a woman, wish to bewitch a man, do not fear that you might 
"offend" simply because the oils and fragrances of your flesh have not been scrubbed away, 
or that place between your thighs is not dry and sterile. These natural odors are the sexual 
stimulants which nature, in her magical wisdom, has provided. 



The sentiment stimulants are those odors that will appeal to pleasant memories and nostalgia. 
The enchanting of a man, through his stomach, is first established by the smell of cooking! A 
"sentiment" type of witch will find this one of the most useful of all charms. It is not so 
facetious to dwell upon the technique of the man who wished to charm the young lady who 
had been displaced from her home of childhood joys, which happened to be a fishing village. 
Wise to the ways of lesser magic, he neatly tucked a mackerel into his trousers pocket, and 
reaped the rewards that great fondness may often bring. 



THE THREE TYPES 
OF 

SATANIC RITUAL 



JFK 

jjja There are three types of ceremony incoiporated in the practice of Satanic magic. Each 

^■fef of these correspond to a basic human emotion. The first of these we shall call a sex 
Jm ritual. 

9 A sex ritual is what is commonly known as a love charm or spell. The purpose in 
\ performing such a ritual is to create desire on the part of the person whom you desire, 
] or to summon a sex partner to fulfill your desires. If you have no specific person or 
type of person in mind strong enough to cause direct sexual feeling culminating in 
orgasm, you will not succeed in performing as successful working. The reason for this is that 
even if the ritual was successful, by accident, what good would it serve if you could not take 
advantage of your eventual opportunity because of lack of stimulation or desire? It is easy to 
confuse enchantment for your ulterior motives, with spell- casting to satisfy your sexual 
desires. 



Enchantment for self-aggrandizement, when accompanied by ceremonial magic, falls into the 
category of either the compassion or the destruction ritual, or possibly both. If you want or 
need something so badly you are sad or feel much anguish without it, without causing hurt on 
another's part, then this would incorporate a compassion ritual to increase your power. If you 
wish to enchant or entrap a deserving victim for your own purposes, you would employ a 
destruction ritual. These formulas are to be adhered to, as applying the wrong type of ritual 
towards a desired result can lead to trouble of a complicated nature. 

A good example of this is the girl who finds herself plagued by a relentless suitor. If she has 
done little to encourage him, then she should recognize him for the psychic vampire he is, and 
let him play his masochistic role. If, however, she has enchanted him frivolously, giving him 
every encouragement and then finds herself a steady object of sexual desire, much to her 
dismay, she has no one to blame but herself. Such exercises are only ego boosts, borne of an 
indoctrination of ego denial which makes these little bewitchments necessary. The Satanist 
has enough ego strength to use enchantments for her own sexual gratification, or to gain 
power or success of a specific nature. 

The second type of ritual is of a compassionate nature. The compassion, or sentiment, ritual is 
performed for the purpose of helping others, or helping oneself. Health, domestic happiness, 
business activities, material success, and scholastic prowess are but a few of the situations 
covered in a compassion ritual. It might be said that this form of ceremony could fall into the 
realm of genuine charity, bearing in mind that "charity begins at home". 

The third motivating force is that of destruction. This is a ceremony used for anger, 
annoyance, disdain, contempt, or just plain hate. It is known as a hex, curse, or destroying 
agent. 

One of the greatest of all fallacies about the practice of ritual magic is the notion that one 
must believe in the powers of magic before one can be harmed or destroyed by them. Nothing 
could be farther from the truth, as the most receptive victims of curses have always been the 
greatest scoffers. The reason is frighteningly simple. The uncivilized tribesman is the first to 



run to his nearest witch-doctor or shaman when he feels a curse has been placed upon him by 
an enemy. The threat and presence of harm is with him consciously, and belief in the power of 
the curse is so strong that he will take every precaution against it. Thus, through the 
application of sympathetic magic, he will counteract any harm that might come his way. This 
man is watching his step, and not taking any chances. 

On the other hand, the "enlightened" man, who doesn't place any stock in such "superstition", 
relegates his instinctive fear of the curse to his unconscious, thereby nourishing it into a 
phenomenally destructive force that will multiply with each succeeding misfortune. Of course, 
every time a new setback occurs, the non-believer will automatically deny any connection 
with the curse, especially to himself. The emphatic conscious denial of the potential of the 
curse is the very ingredient that will create its success, through setting-up of accident prone 
situations. In many instances, the victim will deny any magical significance to his fate, even 
unto his dying gasp - although the magician is perfectly satisfied, so long as his desired results 
occur. It must be remembered that it matters not whether anyone attaches any significance to 
your working, so long as the results of the working are in accordance with your will. The 
super- logician will always explain the connection of the magical ritual to the end result as 
"coincidence". 

Whether magic is performed for constructive or destructive purposes, the success of the 
operation is dependent on the receptivity of the person who is to receive the blessing or curse, 
as the case may be. In the case of a sex or compassion ritual, it helps if the recipient has faith 
and believes in magic, but the victim of a hex or curse is much more prone to destruction if he 
does not believe in it! So long as man knows the meaning of fear, he will need the ways and 
means to defend himself against his fears. No one knows everything, and as long as there is 
wonder, there will always be an apprehension of the unknown, where there are potentially 
dangerous forces. It is this natural fear of the unknown, a first cousin to the fascination 
towards the unknown, that impels the man of logic towards his very explanations. Obviously, 
the man of science is motivated to discovery by his very sense of wonder. And yet, how sad 
that this man who calls himself logical is often the last to recognize the essence of ritual 
magic. 

If religious faith can make bleeding wounds appear on the body in approximation to the 
wounds supposedly inflicted on Christ, it is called stigmata. These wounds appear as a result 
of compassion driven to an emotionally violent extreme. Why, then, should there be any 
doubt as to the destructive extremes of fear and terror. The so-called demons have the power 
to destroy in a flesh rending manner, theoretically, as much as a handful of nails, long rusted 
away, can create blood- dripping ecstasy in a person convinced he is hooked upon the cross of 
Calvary. 

Therefore, never attempt to convince the skeptic upon whom you wish to place a curse. Allow 
him to scoff. To enlighten him would lessen your chance of success. Listen with benign 
assurance as he laughs at your magic, knowing his days are filled with turmoil all the while. If 
he is despicable enough, by Satan's grace, he might even die - laughing! 

A WORD OF WARNING! 
TO THOSE WHO WOULD PRACTICE THESE ARTS - 

Concerning Sex or Take full advantage of spells and charms that work; if you be a 

Lust: man, plunge your erect member into her with lascivious delight; if 

you be a woman, open wide your loins in lewd anticipation. 



Concerning Be resolved that you '11 have no regrets at the expense of the help 

Compassion: that you have given others, should their new-found blessings place 

an obstacle in your path. Be grateful for things that come to you 

through the use of magic. 

Concerning Be certain you do not care if the intended victim lives or dies, 

Destruction: before you throw your curse, and having caused their destruction, 

revel, rather than feel remorse. 



HEED WELL THESE RULES - OR IN 
EACH CASE YOU WILL SEE A REVERSAL 
OF YOUR DESIRES WHICH WILL 
HARM, RATHER THAN HELP, YOU! 



THE RITUAL, OR 
"INTELLECTUAL DECOMPRESSION", 
CHAMBER 




A magical ceremony may be performed by oneself or in a group, but the advantages 
of each should be made clear. 

A group ritual is certainly much more of a reinforcement of faith, and an instillation of 
power, than is a private ceremony. The massing together of persons who are dedicated 
to a common philosophy is bound to insure a renewal of confidence in the power of 
magic. The pageantry of religion consistentiy becomes a solitary situation it reaches 
into that realm of self-denial which runs concurrent with anti- social behavior. 

It is for this reason that the Satanist should attempt to seek out others with whom to engage in 
these ceremonies. 

In the case of a curse or destruction ritual, it sometimes helps the magician if his desires are 
intensified by other members of the group. There is nothing in this type of ceremony which 
would lead to embarrassment on the part of those conducting a ritual of this sort, since anger 
and the symbolic destruction of the intended victim are the essential ingredients. 

On the other hand, a compassion ritual, with its unashamed shedding of tears, or a sex ritual, 
with its masturbatory and orgasmic overtones, would most likely succeed best if privately 
performed. 

There is no place for self- consciousness in the ritual chamber, unless that very self- 
consciousness is an integral part of the role being played, and can be used to good advantage - 
i.e.: the shame felt by a prudent woman serving as an altar, who, through her embarrassment, 
feels sexual stimulation. 

Even in a totally personalized ritual, however, the standardized preliminary invocations and 
devices should be employed before the intimate fantasies and acting out occur. The formal 
part of the ritual can be performed in the same room or chamber as the personalized working - 
or, the formal ceremony in one place, the personal in another. The beginning and end of the 
ritual must be conducted within the confines of the ritual chamber containing the symbolic 
devices (altar, chalice, etc.). 

The formalized beginning and end of the ceremony acts as a dogmatic, anti- intellectual 
device, the purpose of which is to disassociate the activities and frame of reference of the 
outside world from that of the ritual chamber, where the whole will must be employed. This 
facet of the ceremony is most important to the intellectual, as he especially requires the 
"decompression chamber" effect of the chants, bells, candles, and other trappings, before he 
can put his pure and willful desires to work for himself, in the projection and utilization of his 
imagery. 

The "intellectual decompression chamber" of the Satanic temple might be considered a 
training school for temporary ignorance, as are all religious services! The difference is that 
the Satanist knows he is practicing a form of contrived ignorance in order to expand his will, 
whereas another religionist doesn't - or if he does know, he practices that form of self-deceit 




which forbids such recognition. His ego is already too shaky from his religious inculcation to 
allow himself to admit to such a thing as self-imposed ignorance! 



THE INGREDIENTS USED 
IN THE PERFORMANCE 
OF SATANIC MAGIC 



A. Desire 



Sm -I- he first ingredient in the performance of a ritual is desire, otherwise known as 
^■t^motivation, temptation, or emotional persuasion. If you do not truly desire any end 
Jm result, you should not attempt to perform a working. 

9 There is no such thing as a "practice" working, and the only way that a magician could 
\ do "tricks" such as moving inanimate objects, would be to have a strong emotional 
) need to do so. It is true that if the magician wishes to gain power through impressing 
others with his feats of magic, he must produce tangible proof of his ability. The 
Satanic concept of magic, however, fails to find gratification in the proving of magical 
prowess. 

The Satanist performs his ritual to insure the outcome of his desires, and he would not waste 
his time nor force of will on something so inconclusive as rolling a pencil off a table, etc. 
through the application of magic. The amount of energy needed to levitate a teacup 
(genuinely) would be of sufficient force to place an idea in a group of people's heads half-way 
across the earth, in turn, motivating them in accordance with your will. The Satanist knows 
that even if you succeeded in lifting the teacup from the table, it would be assumed that 
trickery was used anyway. Therefore, if the Satanist wants to float objects in mid- air, he uses 
wires, mirrors, or other devices, and saves his force for self-aggrandizement. All "gifted" 
mediums and white- light mystics practice pure and applied stage magic, with their blindfolds 
and sealed envelopes, and any fairly competent stage magician, carnival worker, or lodge-hall 
entertainer can duplicate the same effect - although lacking, perhaps, the sanctimonious 
"spiritual" overtones. 

A little child learns that if he wishes for something hard enough, it will come true. This is 
meaningful. Wishing indicates desire, whereas prayer is accompanied by apprehension. 
Scripture has twisted desire into lust, covetousness, and greed. Be as a child, and do not stifle 
desire, lest you lose touch with the first ingredient in the performance of magic. Be led into 
temptation, and take that which tempts, whenever you can! 



THE INGREDIENTS USED 
IN THE PERFORMANCE 
OF SATANIC MAGIC 



B. Timing 



flff In every successful situation, one of the most important ingredients is the proper 
iBt^timing. In the performance of a magical ritual, timing can mean success or failure to an 
Jm even greater extent. The best time to cast your spell or charm, hex or curse, is when 
£ your target is at his most receptive state. Receptivity to the will of the magician is 
W assured when the recipient is as passive as possible. No matter how strong-willed one 
\ is, he is naturally passive while he is asleep; therefore, the best time to throw your 
j magical energy towards your target is when he or she sleeps. 

There are certain periods of the sleep cycle that are better than others for susceptibility to 
outside influences. When a person is normally fatigued from a day's activities, he will "sleep 
like a log" until his mind and body are rested. This period of profound sleep usually lasts 
about four to six hours, after which the period of "dream sleep" occurs which lasts two or 
three hours, or until awakening. It is during this "dream sleep" that the mind is most receptive 
to outside or unconscious influence. 

Let us assume the magician wishes to cast a spell on a person who would usually retire at 1 1 
o'clock in the evening, and rise at 7 o'clock in the morning. The most effective time to 
perform a ritual would be about 5 o'clock in the morning, or two hours before the recipient 
awakens. 

It is to be emphasized that the magician must be at his peak of efficiency, as he represents the 
"sending" factor when he performs his ritual. Traditionally speaking, witches and sorcerers 
are night people, and understandably so. What better schedule on which to live, for the 
sending of thoughts towards unsuspecting sleepers! If only people were aware of the thoughts 
injected into their minds while they slept! The dream state is the birthplace of much of the 
future. Great thoughts are manifest upon awakening, and the mind that retains, in conscious 
form, these thoughts, shall produce much. But he who is guided by thoughts unrecognized is 
led into situations that will later be interpreted as "fate", "God's will", or accident. 

There are other times in each person's day that lend themselves to the receiving of the will of 
the wizard. Those times when day-dreaming or boredom ensue, or when time hangs heavy, 
are fertile periods of suggestibility. 

If a woman is the target for your spell, do not forget the importance of the menstrual cycle. If 
man were not dulled through his stifling evolutionary development, he would know, as an all- 
fours animal knows, when the female was most sexually inclined. Man's snout, however 
unsullied by cheap opiates, is not normally equipped to ferret out such tell-tale erotic scents. 
Even if he were so endowed with such olfactory powers, the object of his quest would most 
likely "throw him off the scent" through the use of massive doses of perfumery to cover and 
smother the "offending" effluvium, or eliminate detection completely, by the astringent action 
of powerful deodorants. 



Despite these discouraging factors, man is still motivated to desire or be repelled, as the case 
may be, by his unconscious recognition of the change in woman's body chemistry. This is 
accomplished in the form of a sensory cue, which is olfactory in its nature. To go backwards, 
in what would amount to a return to the all- fours animal, would seem to be the best exercise 
for the conscious application of these powers, but to the squeamish might smack of 
lycanthropy. There is, however, an easier way, and that is to simply ascertain the dates and 
frequency of the menstrual cycle of the woman who is your target. It is immediately before 
and after the period itself that the average woman is most sexually approachable. Therefore, 
the magician will find the sleep period during these times most effective for the instillation of 
thoughts or motivations of a sexual nature. 

Witches and sorceresses have a much greater range of time in which to cast their spells 
toward the men of their choice. Because man is more consistent in his sexual drives than 
woman (although there are many women with equal or even greater lusts), day to day timing 
is not as important. Any man who is not already drained of all sexual energy is a "sitting 
duck" for the proficient witch. The time of the year following the spring equinox is the most 
fraught with sexual vigor in a man, and he asserts himself accordingly; but the witch, in turn, 
must work her magic stronger, as she will find his eyes will stray. 

Should the fearful ask, "Is there no defense against such witchery?" it must be answered thus - 
"Yes, there is protection. You must never sleep, never daydream, never be without a vital 
thought, and never have an open mind. Then you shall be protected from the forces of magic." 



THE INGREDIENTS USED 
IN THE PERFORMANCE 
OF SATANIC MAGIC 



C. Imagery 



The adolescent boy who takes great care in carving, on a tree, a heart containing his 
and his love object's initials; the little chap who sits by the hour drawing his conception 
of sleek automobiles; the tiny girl who rocks a scuffed and ragged doll in her arms, and 
thinks of it as her beautiful little baby - these capable witches and warlocks, these 
natural magicians, are employing the magical ingredient known as imagery, and the 
success of any ritual depends on it. 

Children, not knowing or caring if they possess artistic skill or other creative talents, 
pursue their goals through the use of imagery of their own manufacture, whereas "civilized" 
adults are much more critical of their own creative efforts. This is why a "primitive" magician 
can utilize a mud doll or crude drawing to successful advantage in his magical ceremonies. To 
him, the image is as accurate as needs be. 

Anything which serves to intensify the emotions during a ritual will contribute to its success. 
Any drawing, painting, sculpture, writing, photograph, article of clothing, scent, sound, 
music, tableau, or contrived situation that can be incorporated into the ceremony will serve 
the sorcerer well. 



Imagery is a constant reminder, an intellect- saving device, a working substitute for the real 
thing. Imagery can be manipulated, set up, modified, and created, all according to the will of 
the magician, and the very blueprint that is created by imagery becomes the formula which 
leads to reality. 

If you wish to enjoy sexual pleasures with the one of your choice, you must create the 
situation you desire on paper, canvas, by the written word, etc., in as overstated a way as 
possible, as an integral part of the ceremony. 

If you have material desires, you must gaze upon images of them - surround yourself with the 
smells and sounds conducive to them - create a lodestone which will attract the situation or 
thing that you wish! 

To insure the destruction of an enemy, you must destroy them by proxy! They must be shot, 
stabbed, sickened, burned, smashed, drowned, or rent in the most vividly convincing manner! 
It is easy to see why the religions of the right-hand path frown upon the creation of "graven 
images". The imagery used by the sorcerer is a working mechanism for material reality, which 
is totally opposed to esoteric spirituality. 

A Greek gentleman of magical persuasion once wanted a woman who would satisfy his every 
desire, and so obsessed with the unfound object of his dreams was he, that he went about 
constructing such a wonderful creature. His work completed, he fell so convincingly and 
irrevocably in love with the woman he had created that she was no longer stone, but mortal 
flesh, and alive and warm; and so the magus, Pygmalion, received the greatest of magical 



benedictions, and the beautiful Galatea was his. 



THE INGREDIENTS USED 
IN THE PERFORMANCE 
OF SATANIC MAGIC 

D. Direction 



JSl Onl of the most overlooked ingredients in the working of magic is the accumulation 
^■j^and subsequent direction of force toward an effective end. 

£ Altogether too many would-be witches and warlocks will perform a ritual, and then go 
9 about with tremendous anxiety waiting for the first sign of a successful working. For 
\ all intent and purpose, they might as well get down on their knees and pray, for their 
J very anxiety in waiting for the desired results only nullifies any real chance of success. 
Furthermore, with this attitude, it is doubtful that enough concentrated energy to even 
perform a proper ceremony could be stored up in the first place. 

To dwell upon or constantly complain about the situation upon which your ritual would be 
based only guarantees the weakening of what should be ritualistically directed force, by 
spreading it thin and diluting it. Once the desire has been established strongly enough to 
employ the forces of magic, then every attempt must be made to symbolically give vent to 
these wishes in the performance of the ritual - NOT before or after! 

The purpose of the ritual is to free the magician from thoughts that would consume him, were 
he to dwell upon them constantiy. Contemplation, daydreaming and constant scheming bums 
up emotional energy that could be gathered together in a dynamically usable force; not to 
mention the fact that normal productivity is severely depleted by such consuming anxiety. 

The witch who casts her spells between long waits by the telephone, anticipating her would- 
be lover's call; the destitute warlock who invokes Satan's blessing, then waits on pins and 
needles for the check to arrive; the man, saddened by the injustices wrought upon him, who, 
having cursed his enemy, plods his way, long of face, and furrowed of brow - all are common 
examples of misdirected emotional energy. 

Small wonder that the "white" magician fears retribution after casting an "evil" spell! 
Retribution, to the guilt- ridden sender, would be assured, by their very conscience- stricken 
state! 



THE INGREDIENTS USED 
IN THE PERFORMANCE 
OF SATANIC MAGIC 



E. The Balance Factor 



The Balance Factor is an ingredient employed in the practice of ritual magic which 
rapplies to the casting of lust and compassion rituals more than in the throwing of a 
curse. This ingredient is a small, but extremely important one. 

A complete knowledge and awareness of this factor is an ability few witches and 
warlocks ever attain. This is, simply, knowing the proper type of individual and 
situation to work your magic on for the easiest and best results. Knowing one's own 
limitations is a rather odd bit of introspection, it would seem, for a person who should 
be able to perform the impossible; but under many conditions it can make the difference 
between success and failure. 



If, in attempting to attain your goal through either greater or lesser magic, you find yourself 
failing consistently, think about these things: Have you been the victim of a misdirected, over- 
blown ego which has caused you to want something or someone when the chances are 
virtually non-existent? Are you a talentless, tone-deaf individual who is attempting, through 
magic, to receive great acclaim for your unmusical voice? Are you a plain, glamorless witch 
with oversized feet, nose, and ego, combined with an advanced case of acne, who is casting 
love spells to catch a handsome young movie star? Are you a gross, lumpy, lewd- mouthed, 
snaggle-toothed loafer who is desirous of a luscious young stripper? If so, you'd better learn to 
use the balance factor, or else expect to fail consistently! 

To be able to adjust one's wants to one's capabilities is a great talent, and too many people fail 
to realize that if they are unable to attain the maximum, "a half a loaf can be better than 
none". The chronic loser is always the man who, having nothing, if unable to make a million 
dollars, will reject any chance to make fifty thousand with a disgruntied sneer. 

One of the magician's greatest weapons is knowing himself; his talents, abilities, physical 
attractions and detractions, etc., and when, where, and with whom to utilize them! The man 
with nothing to offer, who approaches the man who is successful with grandiose advice and 
promise of great wealth, has the alacrity of the flea climbing up the elephant's leg with the 
intention of rape! 

The aspiring witch who deludes herself into thinking that a powerful enough working will 
always succeed, despite a magical imbalance, is forgetting one essential rule: magic is like 

NATURE ITSELF, AND SUCCESS IN MAGIC REQUIRES WORKING IN HARMONY WITH NATURE, NOT AGAINST IT. 



THE 

SATANIC RITUAL 



A. NOTES WHICH ARE TO BE OBSERVED 
BEFORE BEGINNING RITUAL 

1 . Person performing ritual stands facing the altar and symbol of Baphomet throughout 
ritual, except when other positions are specifically indicated. 

2. If possible, altar should be against west wall. 

3. In rituals performed by one person the role of priest is not required. When more than 
one person is involved in the ceremony, one of them must act as priest. In a private 
ritual the sole performer follows the instructions for the priest. 

4. Whenever the words "Sherrihamforash!'' and "Hail Satan!" are spoken by the person 
acting as priest, the other participants will repeat the words after him. The gong is 
struck following the other participants' response to "Hail Satan!" 

5. Conversing (except within the context of the ceremony) and smoking are prohibited 
after the bell is rung at the beginning, until after it is again rung at the end of the ritual. 

6. The Book of Belial contains the principles of Satanic magic and ritual. Before 
attempting the rituals in the Book of Leviathan, it is imperative that you read and 
understand the complete Book of Belial. Until you have done so, no degree of success 
can be expected from the thirteen steps which follow. 



THE 

SATANIC RITUAL 



B. THE THIRTEEN STEPS 

(See Devices Used in a Satanic Ritual 
for detailed instructions.) 

1 . Dress for ritual. 

2. Assemble devices for ritual; light candles and shut out all outside light sources; place 
parchments to right and left of the altar as indicated. 

3. If a woman is used as the altar she now takes her position - head pointing south, feet 
pointing north. 

4. Purification of the air by ringing of the bell. 

5. "Invocation to Satan" and "Infernal Names" which follow (see Book of Leviathan ) are 
now read aloud by priest. Participants will repeat each Infernal Name after it has been 
said by priest. 

6. Drink from chalice. 

7. Turning counter-clockwise, the priest points with the sword to each cardinal point of 
the compass and calls forth the respective Princes of Hell: Satan from the south, 
Lucifer from the east, Belial from the north, and Leviathan from the west. 

8. Perform benediction with the phallus (if one is used). 

9. Priest reads aloud appropriate invocation for respective ceremony: Lust, Compassion, 
or Destruction (see Book of Leviathan ). 

10. In the case of a personalized ritual this step is extremely important. Solitude is 
compatible with the expressing of the most secret desires, and no attempt to "hold 
back" should be made in the acting out, verbalizing, or casting of images pertaining to 
your desires. It is at this step that your "blueprint" is drawn, wrapped, and sent off to 
the recipient of your working. 



(A) 



To Summon One For Lustful Purpose Or Establish 
A Sexually Gratifying Situation 

Leave the area of the altar and remove yourself to that place, either in the same room 
or without, that will be most conducive to the working of the respective ritual. Then, 
fashion whatever imagery you possibly can that will parallel in as exact a way possible 
the situation towards which you strive. Remember, you have five senses to utilize, so 
do not feel you must limit your imagery to one. Here are devices that may be 
employed (either alone, or in any combination): 

a. graphic imagery such as drawings, paintings, etc. 

b. written imagery such as stories, plays, descriptions of desires and eventual 
outcome of same. 

c. acting out the desire in tableau or playet, either as yourself or portraying the 
role of the object of your desire (transference), using any devices necessary to 
intensify imagery. 

d. any odors relative to the desired person or situation. 

e. any sounds or background noises conducive to a strong image. 

Intense sexual feeling should accompany this step of the ritual, and after sufficient 
imagery is obtained, as strong an orgasm as is possible should serve as climax to this 
step. This climax should be attained using any masturbatory or auto-erotic means 
necessary. After orgasm is obtained, return to the location of the altar and proceed 
with step #11. 

(B) 

To Insure Help Or Success For One Who Has Your 
Sympathy Or Compassion (Including Yourself) 

Remain in close proximity of the altar and with as vivid a mental image as possible of 
the person you wish to help (or intense self-pity), state your desire in your own terms. 
Should your emotions be genuine enough, they will be accompanied the shedding of 
tears, which should be allowed to flow without restraint. After this exercise in 
sentiment is completed, proceed to step #11. 

(C) 

To Cause The Destruction Of An Enemy 

Remain in the area of the altar unless imagery is more easily obtained in another spot, 
such as in the vicinity of the victim. Producing the image of the victim, proceed to 
inflict the destruction upon the effigy in the manner of your choice. This can be done 
in the following ways: 

f. the sticking of pins or nails into a doll representing your victim; the doll may 
be cloth, wax, wood, vegetable matter, etc. 

g. the creation of graphic imagery depicting the method of your victim's 
destruction; drawings, paintings, etc. 



h. the creation of a vivid literary description of your victim's ultimate end. 

i. a detailed soliloquy directed at the intended victim, describing his torments and 
annihilation. 

j . mutilation, injury, infliction of pain or illness by proxy using any other means 
or devices desired. 

Intense, calculated hatred and disdain should accompany this step of the ceremony, 
and no attempt should be made to stop this step until the expended energy results in a 
state of relative exhaustion on the part of the magician. When the exhaustion ensues, 
proceed to step #11. 

1 1 . (a) If requests are written, they are now read aloud by the priest and then burned in the 
flames of the appropriate candle. "Shemhamforash!" and "Hail Satan!" is said after 
each request. 

1 1 . (b) If requests are given verbally, participants (one at a time) now tell them to the 
priest. He then repeats in his own words (those which are most emotionally 
stimulating to him) the request. "Shemhamforash!" and "Hail Satan!" is said after each 
request. 

12. Appropriate Enochian Key is now read by the priest, as evidence of the participants' 
allegiance to the Powers of Darkness. 

13. Ringing of the bell as pollutionary, and then the words "so it is done" are spoken by the 
priest. 



END OF RITUAL 



THE 

SATANIC RITUAL 



C. DEVICES USED IN A SATANIC RITUAL 

CLOTHING 

Black robes are worn by the male participants. The robes may be cowled or hooded, and if 
desired may cover the face. The purpose in covering the face is to allow the participant 
freedom to express emotion in the face, without concern. It also lessens distraction on the part 
of one participant towards another. Female participants wear garments which are sexually 
suggestive; or all black clothing for older women. Amulets bearing the sigil of Baphomet or 
the traditional pentagram of Satan are worn by all participants. 

Robes are donned by men before entering the ritual chamber, and are worn throughout the 
ritual. Men may substitute all black clothing for black robes. 

Black is chosen for the attire in the ritual chamber because it is symbolic of the Powers of 
Darkness. Sexually appealing clothing is worn by women for the purpose of stimulating the 
emotions of the male participants, and thereby intensifying the outpouring of adrenal or bio- 
electrical energy which will insure a more powerful working. 



ALTAR 

Man's earliest altars were living flesh and blood; and man's natural instincts and predilections 
were the foundation on which his religions were based. Later religions, in making man's 
natural inclinations sinful, perverted his living altars into slabs of stone and lumps of metal. 

Satanism is a religion of the flesh, rather than of the spirit; therefore, an altar of flesh is used 
in Satanic ceremonies. The purpose of an altar is to serve as a focal point towards which all 
attention is focused during a ceremony. A nude woman is used as the altar in Satanic rituals 
because woman is the natural passive receptor, and represents the earth mother. 

In some rituals nudity for the woman serving as altar may be impractical, so she may be 
clothed or partially covered. If a female is performing the ritual alone, no woman need be 
used for the altar. If no female is used for the altar, the elevated plane used for her to he upon 
may be used to hold other devices for the ritual. For large group rituals a trapezoidal altar 
about 3 to 4 feet high and 5Vi to 6 feet long can be specially constructed for the woman to he 
upon. If this is impractical, or in private ceremonies, any elevated plane may be used. If a 



woman is used for the altar, the other devices may be placed upon a table within easy reach of 
the priest. 



SYMBOL OF BAPHOMET 

The symbol of Baphomet was used by the Knights Templar to represent Satan. Through the 
ages this symbol has been called by many different names. Among these are: The Goat of 
Mendes, The Goat of a Thousand Young, The Black Goat, The Judas Goat, and perhaps the 
most appropriately, The Scapegoat. 

Baphomet represents the Powers of Darkness combined with the generative fertility of the 
goat. In its "pure" form the pentagram is shown encompassing the figure of a man in the five 
points of the star - three points up, two pointing down - symbolizing man's spiritual nature. In 
Satanism the pentagram is also used, but since Satanism represents the carnal instincts of 
man, or the opposite of spiritual nature, the pentagram is inverted to perfectly accommodate the 
head of the goat - its horns, representing duality, thrust upwards in defiance; the other three 
points inverted, or the trinity denied. The Hebraic figures around the outer circle of the 
symbol which stem from the magical teachings of the Kabala, spell out "Leviathan", the 
serpent of the watery abyss, and identified with Satan. These figures correspond to the five 
points of the inverted star. 

The symbol of Baphomet is placed on the wall above the altar. 



CANDLES 

The candles used in Satanic ritual represent the light of Lucifer - the bearer of light, 
enlightenment, the living flame, burning desire, and the Flames of the Pit. 

Only black and white candles are to be used in Satanic ritual. Never use more than one white 
candle; but as many black candles as are required to iUurninate the ritual chamber may be 
used. At least one black candle is placed to the left of the altar, representing the Powers of 
Darkness and the left-hand path. Other black candles are placed where needed for 
inurnination. One white candle is placed to the right of the altar, representing the hypocrisy of 
white light "magicians" and the followers of the right-hand path. No other light source is to be 
used. 

Black candles are used for power and success for the participants of the ritual, and are used to 
consume the parchments on which blessings requested by the ritual participants are written. 
The white candle is used for destruction of enemies. Parchments upon which curses are 
written are burned in the flame of the white candle. 



BELL 

The shattering effect of the bell is used to mark both the beginning and the end of the ritual. 
The priest rings the bell nine times, turning counter clockwise and directing the tolling 



towards the four cardinal points of the compass. This is done once at the beginning of the 
ritual to clear and purify the air of all external sounds, and once again at the end of the ritual 
to intensify the working and act as a pollutionary indicating finality. 

The tonal quality of the bell used should be loud and penetrating, rather than soft and tinkling. 



CHALICE 

In Satanic ritual the chalice or goblet used represents the Chalice of Ecstasy. Ideally, the 
chalice should be made of silver, but if a silver chalice can not be obtained, one made from 
another metal, glass, or crockery may be used - anything but gold. Gold has always been 
associated with white- light religions and the Heavenly Realm. 

The chalice is to be drunk from first by the priest, then by one assistant. In private rituals the 
person perfonning the ceremony drains the chalice. 



ELIXIR 

The stimulating fluid or Elixir of Life used by the Pagans has been corrupted into sacramental 
wine by the Christian faith. Originally, the liquor used in Pagan rituals was drunk to relax and 
intensify the emotions of those involved in the ceremony. Satanism does not sacrifice its god, 
as do other religions. The Satanist practices no such form of symbolic cannibalism, and 
returns the sacramental wine used by the Christians to its original purpose - that of stimulating 
the emotions necessary to Satanic ritual. Wine itself need not be used - whatever drink is most 
stimulating and pleasing to the palate is in order. 

The Elixir of Life is to be drunk from the Chalice of Ecstasy, as indicated above, immediately 
following the Invocation to Satan. 



SWORD 

The Sword of Power is symbolic of aggressive force, and acts as an extension and intensifier 
of the arm with which the priest uses to gesture and point. A parallel to this is the pointing 
stick or blasting wand used in other forms of magical ritual. 

The sword is held by the priest and is used to point towards the symbol of Baphomet during 
the Invocation to Satan. It is also used, as indicated in Steps of Ritual, when calling forth the 
four Princes of Hell. The priest thrusts the point of the sword through the parchment 
containing the message or request after it has been read aloud; it is then used to hold the 
parchment while introduced into the candle flame. While hearing the requests of other 
participants, and while repeating same, the priest places the sword atop their heads (in 
traditional "knighting" fashion). 

For private rituals, if a sword cannot be obtained, a long knife, cane, or similar staff may be 
used. 



PHALLUS 



The phallus is a Pagan fertility symbol which represents generation, virility, and aggression. 
This is yet another device which has been blasphemously converted to fit the guild-ridden 
ceremonies of Christianity. The phallus is a non- hypocritical version of the aspergillum, or 
"holy water sprinkler'' used in Catholicism - quite a metamorphosis of the common penis! 

The phallus is held in both hands of one of the priest's assistants, and methodically shaken 
twice towards each cardinal point of the compass, for the benediction of the house. 

Any phallic symbol may be used. If none is obtainable one may be made from plaster, wood, 
clay, wax, etc. The phallus is necessary only in organized group rituals. 



GONG 

The gong is used to call upon the forces of Darkness. It is to be struck once after the 
participants have repeated the priest's words, "Hail Satan!". A gong is necessary only in 
organized group rituals. For the best tonal quality a concert gong is preferred, but if one 
cannot be obtained any gong with a full, rich tone may be used. 



PARCHMENT 

Parchment is used because its organic properties are compatible with the elements of nature. 
In keeping with the Satanic views on sacrifice, the parchment used would be made from the 
skin of a sheep which was, by necessity, killed for food. An animal is never slaughtered for 
the purpose of using all or a part of that animal in a Satanic ritual. If commercial parchment 
which has been made from already slaughtered sheep cannot be obtained, plain paper may be 
substituted. 

The parchment is the means by which the written message or request can be consumed by the 
candle flame and sent out into the ether. The request is written on parchment or paper, read 
aloud by the priest, and then burned in the flame of either the black or white candle - 
whichever is appropriate for the particular request. Before the ritual begins curses are placed 
to the right of the priest, and charms or blessings are placed to the left of him. 



(WATER) 



THE BOOK OF LEVIATHAN 

THE RAGING SEA 

Despite all non- verbalists' protests to the contrary, soaring heights of emotional ecstasy or 
raging pangs of anguish can be attained through verbal communication. If the magical 
ceremony is to employ all sensory awarenesses, then the proper sounds must be invoked. It is 
certainly true that "actions speak louder than words", but words become as monuments to 
thoughts. 

Perhaps the most noticeable shortcoming in the printed magical conjurations of the past is the 
lack of emotion developed upon the reciting of them. An old wizard known to the author, who 
was once employing a self- composed invocation of great personal meaning in the light of his 
magical desires, ran out of words just as his ritual was moments short of its successful 
culmination. Aware of the necessity of keeping his emotional response generating, he quickly 
adlibbed the first emotion- provoking words that came to mind - a few stanzas of a poem by 
Rudyard Kipling! Thus, with this final burst of glory- charged adrenalin, was he able to 
finalize an effective working! 

The invocations which follow are designed to serve as proclamations of certainty, not whining 
apprehension. For this reason they are devoid of shallow offerings -up and hollow charities. 
Leviathan, the great Dragon from the Watery Abyss, roars forth as the surging sea, and these 
invocations are his tribunals. 



INVOCATION 
TO 

SATAN 



In nomine Dei nostri Satanas Luciferi excelsi! 

In the name of Satan, the Ruler of the earth, the King of the world, I command the forces of 
Darkness to bestow their Infernal power upon me! 

Open wide the gates of Hell and come forth from the abyss to greet me as your brother (sister) 
and friend ! 

Grant me the indulgences of which I speak! 

I have taken thy name as a part of myself! I live as the beasts of the field, rejoicing in the 
fleshly life! I favor the just and curse the rotten! 

By all the Gods of the Pit, I command that these things of which I speak shall come to pass! 
Come forth and answer to your names by manifesting my desires! 



OH HEAR THE NAMES: 



THE INFERNAL NAMES 



The Infernal names are listed here in alphabetical order purely to simplify referral to them. 

When calling the names, all of them may be recited, or a given number of those most 
significant to the respective working may be chosen. 

Whether all or only some of the names are called, they must be taken out of the rigidly 
organized form in which they are listed here and arranged in a phonetically effective roster. 



A hflflflnTi 

/l l / LILILI \ J 1 I 


i—iVii \ji i y 1 1 njvij 


d-YflYYIfl 
\y ± hi i itA 


A flvnwip] pch 


F pytvi V 


Pan 

1 Lit I 


Ahnuch 


Gov go 


Pluto 


A h viwinvt 

iiin iiiila.ii 


T-f nVinwwi 
i AtAisis/ y in 


Prn spvuiup 

1 1 l/JC/ LslllC 


A winvi 


1 1 /' / ■/ 1 tt> 


P\A V W/ 
i WL Let 


A YlCl]]\!YI 


Jen in y 

lot HIAl 


/? i m m /)n 

l\ll 1 ll 1 l\J 1 1 


Asfnodeus 


Kali 


Sobcizios 


A vfnv/ifh 

AO 1 Ll 1 {Jill 


I ilith 


*\nwiwinp] 

kJLlllllllLlxZl 


A 777 7P 1 


I oki 


\n inn i t 

kJLlI 1 ll llA, 


finnJhprith 

U LILIL /./ L / llll 


IV J. Llf tlltH/tl 


Sedit 

kj t Li L I 


Rfllflflftl 
U Ll 1 LILll 1 I 


A/fnyi in 

lV±Ltl I t Li 


S\plchftipt 

kJ C I\ f ll I tc I 


Hnnhowpt 

M-f K-l IJ I M / 1 1 1. 1.. 1 


Mn Vitus 


Set 




A/fnvrliilf 

IVILII LlllIK, 


OiiClilLlll 


Beelzebub 


Mastema 


Shamad 


Behemoth 


Melek Taus 


Shiva 


Beherit 


Mephistopheles 


Supay 


Bile 


Metztli 


Tan-mo 


Chemosh 


Miction 


Tchort 


Cimeries 


Midgard 


Tezcatlipoca 


Coyote 


Milcom 


Thamuz 


Dagon 


Moloch 


Thoth 


Damballa 


Mormo 


Tunrida 


Demogorgon 


Naamah 


Typhon 



Diabolus Nergal Yaotzin 

Dracula Nihasa Yen-lo-Wang 

Emma-0 Nija 



INVOCATION EMPLOYED TOWARDS 
THE CONJURATION OF LUST 

Jml Come forth, Oh great spawn of the abyss and make thy presence manifest. I have set 

^Bjr^my thoughts upon the blazing pinnacle which glows with the chosen lust of the 
W moments of increase and grows fervent in the turgid swell. 

V Send forth that messenger of voluptuous delights, and let these obscene vistas of my 
\ dark desires take form in future deeds and doings. 

From the sixth tower of Satan there shall come a sign which joineth with those saltes 
within, and as such will move the body of the flesh of my summoning. 

I have gathered forth my symbols and prepare my garnishings of the is to be, and the image of 
my creation lurketh as a seething basilisk awaiting his release. 

The vision shall become as reality and through the nourishment that my sacrifice giveth, the 
angles of the first dimension shall become the substance of the third. 

Go out into the void of night (light of day) and pierce that mind that respondeth with thoughts 
which leadeth to paths of lewd abandon. 



(Male) My rod is athrust! The penetrating force of my venom shall shatter the sanctity of 
that mind which is barren of lust; and as the seed falleth, so shall its vapours be 
spread within that reeling brain benumbing it to helplessness according to my 
will! In the name of the great god Pan, may my secret thoughts be marshaled into 
the movements of the flesh of that which I desire! 



Shemhamforash! Hail Satan! 

(Female) My loins are aflame! The dripping of the nectar from my eager cleft shall act as 
pollen to that slumbering brain, and the mind that feels not lust shall on a sudden 
reel with crazed impulse. And when my mighty surge is spent, new wanderings 
shall begin; and that flesh which I desire shall come to me. In the names of the 
great harlot of Babylon, and of Lilith, and of Hecate, may my lust be fulfilled! 



Shemhamforash! 



Hail Satan! 



INVOCATION EMPLOYED TOWARDS 
THE CONJURATION OF DESTRUCTION 

B ehold ! The mighty voices of my vengeance smash the stillness of the air and stand 

^Bfc^as monoliths of wrath upon a plain of writhing seipents. I am become as a monstrous 
W machine of annihilation to the festering fragments of the body of he (she) who would 
£ detain me. 

\ It repenteth me not that my summons doth ride upon the blasting winds which multiply 
J the sting of my bitterness; And great black slimy shapes shall rise from brackish pits 
and vomit forth their pustulence into his (her) puny brain. 

I call upon the messengers of doom to slash with grim delight this victim I hath chosen. Silent 
is that voiceless bird that feeds upon the brain- pulp of him (her) who hath tormented me, and 
the agony of the is to be shall sustain itself in shrieks of pain, only to serve as signals of 
warning to those who would resent my being. 

Oh come forth in the name of Abaddon and destroy him (her) whose name I giveth as a sign. 

Oh great brothers of the night, thou who makest my place of comfort, who rideth out upon the 
hot winds of Hell, who dwelleth in the devil's fane; Move and appear! Present yourselves to 
him (her) who sustaineth the rottenness of the mind that moves the gibbering mouth that 
mocks the just and strong!; rend that gaggling tongue and close his (her) throat, Oh Kali! 
Pierce his (her) lungs with the stings of scorpions, Oh Sekhmet! Plunge his (her) substance 
into the dismal void, Oh mighty Dagon! 

I thrust aloft the bifid barb of Hell and on its tines resplendentiy impaled my sacrifice through 
vengeance rests! 



Shemhamf orash ! 



Hail Satan! 



INVOCATION EMPLOYED TOWARDS 
THE CONJURATION OF COMPASSION 




W,™ the anger of anguish and the wrath of the stifled, I pour forth my voices, 
wrapped in rolling thunder, that you may hear! 

Oh great lurkers in the darkness, oh guardians of the way, oh minions of the might of 
Thoth! Move and appear! Present yourselves to us in your benign power, in behalf of 
one who believes and is stricken with torment. 

Isolate him (her) in the bulwark of your protection, for he (she) is undeserving of 
anguish and desires it not. 

Let that which bears against him (her) be rendered powerless and devoid of substance. 

Succor him (her) through fire and water, earth and air, to regain what he (she) has lost. 

Strengthen with fire the marrow of our friend and companion, our comrade of the Left-Hand 
Path. 

Through the power of Satan let the earth and its pleasures re-enter his (her) being. 

Allow his (her) vital saltes to flow unhampered, that he (she) may savor the carnal nectars of 
his (her) future desires. 

Strike dumb his (her) adversary, formed or formless, that he (she) may emerge joyful and 
strong from that which afflicts him (her). 

Allow no misfortune to allay his (her) path, for he (she) is of us, and therefore to be cherished. 

Restore him (her) to power, to joy, to unending dominion over the reverses that have beset 
him (her). 

Build around and within him (her) the exultant radiance that will herald his (her) emergence 
from the stagnant morass which engulfs him (her). 

This we command, in the name of Satan, whose mercies flourish and whose sustenance will 
prevail! 

As Satan reigns so shall his (her) own whose name is as this sound: (name) is the vessel 
whose flesh is as the earth; life everlasting, world without end! 

Shemhamforash! Hail Satan! 




THE ENOCHIAN LANGUAGE 
AND THE ENOCHIAN KEYS 



ttf The magical language used in Satanic ritual is Enochian, a language thought to be 

^■fefolder than Sanskrit, with a sound grammatical and syntactical bases. It resembles 
W Arabic in some sounds and Hebrew and Latin in others. It first appeared in print in 
£ 1659 in a biography of John Dee, the famous Sixteenth Century seer and court 
9 astrologer. This work, by Meric Casaubon, describes the occultist Dee's activities with 
\ his associate, Edward Kelly, in the art of scrying or crystal gazing. 

Instead of the usual crystal ball, Kelly, who was the gazer, used a many- faceted 
trapezohedron. The "angels" referred to in Kelly's first revelation of the Enochian Keys, 
obtained through the windows of the crystal, are only "angels" because occultists to this day 
have lain ill with metaphysical constipation. Now the crystal clears, and the "angels" are seen 
as "angles" and the windows to the fourth dimension are thrown open - and to the frightened, 
the Gates of Hell. 

I have presented my translation of the following calls with an archaic but Satanically correct 
unvarnishing of the translation employed by the Order of the Golden Dawn in the late 
Nineteenth Century. In Enochian the meaning of the words, combined with the quality of the 
words, unite to create a pattern of sound which can cause tremendous reaction in the 
atmosphere. The barbaric tonal qualities of this language give it a truly magical effect which 
cannot be described. 

For many years the Enochian Keys, or Calls, have been shrouded in secrecy. The few 
printings that have existed completely eliminate the correct wording, as the proper translation 
has been disguised through the use of euphemisms, and only designed to throw the inept 
magician and/or would-be inquisitor off the track. Apocryphal as they have become (and who 
can tell what grim reality provokes the "fantasy"), the Enochian Calls are the Satanic paeans 
of faith. Dispensing with such once- pragmatic whitewashing in terms such as "holy" and 
"angelic", and arbitrarily chosen groups of numbers, the purpose of which were only to act as 
substitutes for "blasphemous" words - here, then, are the true Enochian Calls, as received 
from an unknown hand. 



THE FIRST KEY 



The first Enochian Key represents an initial proclamation from Satan, stating the inception of 
the laws of temporal theologies and of the lasting power which resides in those bold enough 
to recognize earthly beginnings and absolutes. 

(Enochian) 

01 sonuf vaoresaji, gohu IAD Balata, elanusaha caelazod: sobrazod-ol Roray i ta 
nazodapesad, od comemahe ta nobeloha zodien; soba tahil ginonupe pereje aladi, das 
vaurebes obolehe giresam. Casarem ohorela caba Pire: das zodonurenusagi cab: erem 
Iadanahe. Pilahe farezodem zodenurezoda adana gono Iadapiel das home-tohe: soba ipame lu 
ipamis: das sobolo vepe zodomeda poamal, od bogira aai ta piape Piamoel od Vaoan! 
Zodacare, eca, od zodameranu! odo cicale Qaa; zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe 
Saitan! 

(English) 

I reign over thee, saith the Lord of the Earth, in power exalted above and below, in whose 
hands the sun is a guttering sword and the moon a through- thrusting fire, who measureth your 
garments in the midst of my vestures, and trusseth you up as the palms of my hands, and 
brighten your vestments with Infernal light. 

I made ye a law to govern the holy ones, and delivered a rod with wisdom supreme. You 
lifted your voices and swore your allegiance to Him that liveth triumphant, whose beginning 
is not, nor end cannot be, which shineth as a flame in the midst of your palaces, and reigneth 
amongst you as the balance of life! 

Move therefore, and appear! Open the mysteries of your creation! Be friendly unto me, for I 
am the same! - the true worshipper of the highest and ineffable King of Hell! 

THE SECOND KEY 

In order to pay homage to the very lusts which sustain the continuance of life, itself, The 
Second Enochian Key extends this recognition of our earthly heritage unto a talisman of 
power. 

(Enochian) 

Adagita vau-pa-ahe zodonugonu fa-a-ipe salada! Vi-i-vau el! Sobame ial-pereji i-zoda- 
zodazod pi-adapehe casarema aberameji ta ta-labo paracaleda qo-ta lores- el- qo turebesa ooge 
balatohe! Giui cahisa lusada oreri od micalapape cahisa bia ozodonugonu! lape noanu tarofe 
coresa tage o-quo maninu IA-I-DON. Torezodu! gohe-el, zodacare eca ca-no-quoda! 
zodameranu micalazodo od ozadazodame vaurelar; lape zodir IOIAD! 

(English) 

Can the wings of the winds hear your voices of wonder?; O you!, the great spawn of the 
worms of the Earth!, whom the Hell fire frames in the depth of my jaws!, whom I have 
prepared as cups for a wedding or as flowers regaling the chambers of lust! 



Stronger are your feet than the barren stone! Mightier are your voices than the manifold 
winds! For you are become as a building such as is not, save in the mind of the All- Powerful 
manifestation of Satan! 

Arise!, saith the First! Move therefore unto his servants! Show yourselves in power, and make 
me a strong seer- of- things, for I am of Him that liveth forever! 

THE THIRD KEY 

The Third Enochian Key establishes the leadership of the earth upon the hands of those great 
Satanic magicians who throughout the successive ages have held dominion over the peoples 
of the world. 

(Enochian) 

Micama! goho Pe-IAD! zodir com-selahe azodien biabe os-lon-dohe. Norezodacahisa otahila 
Gigipahe; vaunid-el-cahisa ta-pu-ime qo-mos-pelehe telocahe; qui-i-inu toltoregi cahisa i 
cahisaji em ozodien; dasata beregida od torezodul! Ili e-Ol balazodareji, od aala tahilanu-os 
netaabe: daluga vaomesareji elonusa cape-mi-ali varoesa cola homila; cocasabe fafenu 
izodizodope, od rniinoagi de ginetaabe: vaunu na-na-e-el: panupire malapireji caosaji. Pilada 
noanu vaunalahe balata od-vaoan. Do-o-i-ape mada: goholore, gohus, arniranu! Micama! 
Yehusozod ca-ca-com, od do-o-a-inu noari micaolazoda a-ai-om. Casarameji gohia: 
Zodacare! Vaunigilaji! od im-ua-mar pugo pelapeli Ananael Qo-a-an. 

(English) 

Behold!, saith Satan, I am a circle on whose hands stand the Twelve Kingdoms. Six are the 
seats of living breath, the rest are as sharp as sickles, or the Horns of Death. Therein the 
creatures of Earth are and are not, except in mine own hands which sleep and shall rise! 

In the first I made ye stewards and placed ye in the Twelve seats of government, giving unto 
every one of you power successively over the Nine true ages of time, so that from the highest 
vessels and the comers of your governments you might work my power, pouring down the 
fires of life and increase continually on the Earth. Thus you are become the skirts of justice 
and truth. In Satan's name, rise up! Show yourselves! Behold!, his mercies flourish, and his 
name is become mighty among us. In whom we say: Move!, Ascend!, and apply yourselves 
unto us as the partakers of His secret wisdom in your creation! 

THE FOURTH KEY 

The Fourth Enochian Key refers to the cycling of the ages of time. 

(Enochian) 

Otahil elasadi babaje, od dorepaha gohol: gi-cahisaje auauago coremepe peda, dasonuf vi- 
vau-di-vau? Casaremi oeli meapeme sobame agi coremepo carep-el: casaremeji caro-o-dazodi 
cahisa od vaugeji; dasata ca-pi-mali cahisa ca-pi-ma-on: od elonusahinu cahisa ta el-o calaa. 
Torezodu nor-quasahi od fe-caosaga: Bagile zodir e-na-IAD: das iod apila! Do-o-a-ipe quo-A- 
AL, zodacare! Zodameranu obelisonugi resat-el aaf nor-mo-lapi! 



(English) 



I have set my feet in the South, and have looked about me, saying: Are not the thunders of 
increase those which reign in the second angle? 

Under whom I have placed those whom none hath yet numbered, but One; in whom the 
second beginnings of things are and wax strong, successively adding the numbers of time, and 
their powers doth stand as the first of the nine! 

Arise!, you sons of pleasure, and visit the Earth; for I am the Lord, your God, which is and 
liveth forever! 

In the name of Satan, Move!, and show yourselves as pleasant deliverers, that you may praise 
Him among the sons of men! 



THE FIFTH KEY 

The Fifth Enochian Key affirms the Satanic placing of traditional priests and wizards upon the 
earth for the purpose of misdirection. 

(Enochian) 

Sapahe zodimii du-i-be, od noasa ta qu-a-nis, adarocahe dorepehal caosagi od faonutas 
peripesol ta-be-liore. Casareme A-me-ipezodi na-zodaretahe afa; od dalugare zodizodope 
zodelida caosaji tol-toregi; od zod-cahisa esiasacahe El ta-vi-vau; od iao-d tahilada das hubare 
pe-o-al; soba coremefa cahisa ta Ela Vaulasa od Quo-Co-Casabe. Eca niisa od darebesa quo- 
a-asa: fetahe-ar-ezodi od beliora: ia-ial eda-nasa cicalesa; bagile Ge-iad I- el! 

(English) 

The mighty sounds have entered into the third angle and are become as seedlings of folly, 
smiling with contempt upon the Earth, and dwelling in the brightness of the Heaven as 
continual comforters to the destroyers of self. 

Unto whom I fastened the pillars of gladness, the lords of the righteous, and gave them 
vessels to water the earth with her creatures. They are the brothers of the First and the Second, 
and the beginning of their own seats which are garnished with myriad ever-burning lamps, 
whose numbers are as the First, the ends, and the contents of time! 

Therefore, come ye and obey your creation. Visit us in peace and comfort. Conclude us 
receivers of your mysteries; for why? Our Lord and Master is the All- One! 



THE SIXTH KEY 

The Sixth Enochian Key establishes the structure and form of that which has become the 
Order of the Trapezoid and Church of Satan. 



(Enochian) 



Gahe sa-div cahisa em, micalazoda Pil-zodinu, sobam El haraji mir babalonu od obeloce 
samevelaji, dalagare malapereji ar-caosaji od acame canale, sobola zodare fa-beliareda caosaji 
od cahisa aneta-na miame ta Viv od Da. Daresare Sol-petahe-bienu. Be-ri-ta od zodacame ji- 
mi-calazodo: sob-ha-atahe tarianu luia-he od ecarinu MADA Qu-a-a-on! 

(English) 

The spirits of the fourth angle are Nine, mighty in the trapezoid, whom the first hath formed, a 
torment to the wretched and a garland to the wicked; giving unto them fiery darts to vanne the 
earth, and Nine continual workmen whose courses visit with comfort the Earth, and are in 
government and continuance as the Second and Third. 

Therefore, harken unto my voice! I have talked of you, and I move you in power and 
presence, whose works shall be a song of honor, and the praise of your God in your creation! 



THE SEVENTH KEY 

The Seventh Enochian Key is used to invoke lust, pay homage to glamour, and rejoice in the 
delights of the flesh. 

(Enochian) 

Ra-asa isalamanu para-di-zoda oe-cari-mi aao iala-pire-gahe Qui-inu. Enai butamonu od 
inoasa ni pa-ra-diala. Casaremeji ujeare cahirelanu, od zodonace lucifatianu, caresa ta vavale- 
zodirenu tol-hami. Soba lonudohe od nuame cahisa ta Da o Desa vo-me-dea od pi-beliare 
itahila rita od miame ca-ni-quola rita! Zodacare! Zodameranu! Iecarimi Quo-a-dahe od I- 
mica-ol-zododa aaiome. Bajirele papenore idalugama elonusahi-od umapelifa vau-ge-ji Bijil - 
IAD! 

(English) 

The East is a house of harlots singing praises among the flames of the first glory wherein the 
Dark Lord hath opened His mouth; and they are become as living dwellings in whom the 
strength of man rejoiceth; and they are appareled with ornaments of brightness, such as work 
wonders on all creatures. Whose kingdoms and continuance are as the Third and Fourth, 
strong towers and places of comfort, the seats of pleasure and continuance. O ye servants of 
pleasure, Move!, Appear!, sing praises unto the Earth and be mighty amongst us. For that to 
this remembrance is given power, and our strength waxeth strong in our comforter. 



THE EIGHTH KEY 

The Eighth Enochian Key refers to the emergence of the Satanic Age. 



(Enochian) 



Bazodemelo i ta pi-ripesonu olanu Na-zodavabebe ox. Casaremeji varanu cahisa vaugeji asa 
berameji balatoha: goho IAD. Soba miame tarianu ta lolacis Abaivoninu od azodiajiere riore. 
Irejila cahisa da das pa-aox busada Caosago, das cahisa od ipuranu telocahe cacureji o- 
isalamahe lonucaho od Vovina carebafe? NIISO! bagile avavago gohon. NIISO! bagile 
mamao siasionu, od mabezoda IAD oi asa-momare poilape. NUASA! Zodameranu ciaosi 
caosago od belioresa od coresi ta beramiji. 

(English) 

The midday of the first is as the third indulgence made of hyacinthine pillars, in whom the 
elders are become strong, which I have prepared for mine own justice, saith Satan, whose 
long continuance shall be as bucklers to Leviathan. How many are there which remain in the 
glory of the earth, which are, and shall not see death until the house falls and the dragon doth 
sink? Rejoice!, for the crowns of the temple and the robe of Him that is, was, and shall be 
crowned are no longer divided! Come forth!, Appear 



THE NINTH KEY 

The Ninth Enochian Key warns of the use of substances, devices or pharmaceuticals which 
might lead to the delusion and subsequent enslavement of the master. A protection against 
false values. 

(Enochian) 

Micaoli beranusaji perejela napeta ialapore, das barinu efafaje Pe vaunupeho olani od 
obezoda, soba-ca upaahe cahisa tatanu od tarananu balie, alare busada so-bolunu od cahisa 
hoel-qo ca-no-quodi cial. Vaunesa aladonu mom caosago ta iasa olalore gianai limelala. 
Amema cahisa sobra madarida zod cahisa! Ooa moanu cahisa avini darilapi caosajinu: od 
butamoni pareme zodumebi canilu. Dazodisa etahamezoda cahisa dao, od mireka ozodola 
cahisa pidiai Colalala. Ul ci ninu a sobame ucime. Bajile? IAD BALATOHE cahirelanu pare! 
NIISO! od upe ofafafe; bajile a-cocasahe icoresaka a uniji beliore. 

(English) 

A mighty guard of fire with two-edged swords flaming (which contain the vials of delusion, 
whose wings are of wormwood and of the marrow of salt), have set their feet in the West, and 
are measured with their ministers. These gather up the moss of the Earth, as the rich man doth 
his treasure. Cursed are they whose iniquities they are! In their eyes are millstones greater 
than the Earth, and from their mouths run seas of blood. Their brains are covered with 
diamonds, and upon their heads are marble stones. Happy is he on whom they frown not. For 
Why? The Lord of Righteousness rejoiceth in them! Come away, and leave your vials, for the 
time is such as requireth comfort! 



THE TENTH KEY 



The Tenth Enochian Key creates rampant wrath and produces violence. Dangerous to employ 
unless one has learnt to safeguard his own immunity; a random hghtning bolt! 

(Enochian) 

Coraxo cahisa coremepe, od belanusa Lucala azodiazodore paebe Soba iisononu cahisa 
uirequo ope copehanu od racalire maasi bajile caosagi; das yalaponu dosiji od basajime; od ox 
ex dazodisa siatarisa od salaberoxa cynuxire faboanu. Vaunala cahisa conusata das daox 
cocasa o Oanio yore vohima ol jizod-yazoda od eoresa cocasaji pelosi molui das pajeipe, 
laraji same darolanu matorebe cocasaji emena. El pataralaxa yolaci matabe nomiji mononusa 
olora jinayo anujelareda. Ohyo! ohyo! noibe Ohyo! caosagonu! Bajile madarida i zodirope 
cahiso darisapa! NIISO! caripe ipe nidali! 

(English) 

The thunders of wrath doth slumber in the North, in the likeness of an oak whose branches are 
dung- filled nests of lamentation and weeping laid up for the Earth, which bum night and day 
and vomit out the heads of scorpions and live sulphur mingled with poison. These be the 
thunders that in an instant roar with a hundred mighty earthquakes and a thousand as many 
surges, which rest not, nor know any time here. One rock bringeth forth a thousand, even as 
the heart of man doth his thoughts. Woe! Woe!, Yea!, woe be to the Earth, for her iniquity is, 
was, and shall be great. Come away! But not your mighty sounds! 

THE ELEVENTH KEY 

The Eleventh Enochian Key is used to herald the coming of the dead and establish a 
sustenance beyond the grave. To bind to the earth. A funerary call. 

(Enochian) 

Oxiayala holado, od zodirome O coraxo das zodiladare raasyo. Od vabezodire cameliaxa od 
bahala: NIISO! salamanu telocahe! Casaremanu hoel-qo, od ti ta zod cahisa soba coremefa i 
ga. NIISA! bagile aberameji nonucape. Zodacare eca od Zodameranu! odo cicale Qaa! 
Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe Saitan! 

(English) 

The mighty throne growled and there were five thunders that flew into the East. And the eagle 
spake and cried aloud: Come away from the house of death! And they gathered themselves 
together and became those of whom it measured, and they are the deathless ones who ride the 
whirlwinds. Come away! For I have prepared a place for you. Move therefore, and show 
yourselves! Unveil the mysteries of your creation. Be friendly unto me for I am your God, the 
true worshipper of the flesh that liveth forever! 



THE TWELFTH KEY 



The Twelfth Enochian Key is used to vent one's displeasure towards man's need for misery, 
and bring forth torment and conflict to the harbingers of woe. 

(Enochian) 

Nonuci dasonuf Babaje od cahisa ob hubaio tibibipe? alalare ataraahe od ef ! Dark fafenu 
mianu ar Enayo ovof ! Soba dooainu aai i VONUPEHE. Zodacare, gohusa, od Zodameranu. 
Odo cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe Saitan! 

(English) 

O ye that range in the South and are the lanterns of sorrow, buckle your armor and visit us! 
Bring forth the legions of the army of Hell, that the Lord of the Abyss may be magnified, 
whose name amongst ye is Wrath! Move therefore, and appear! Open the mysteries of your 
creation! Be friendly unto me, for I am the same!, the true worshipper of the highest and 
ineffable King of Hell! 

THE THIRTEENTH KEY 

The Thirteenth Enochian Key is used to make the sterile lustful and vex those who would 
deny the pleasures of sex. 

(Enochian) 

Napeai Babajehe das berinu vax ooaona larinuji vonupehe doalime: conisa olalogi oresaha das 
cahisa afefa. Micama isaro Mada od Lonu-sahi-toxa, das ivaumeda aai Jirosabe. Zodacare od 
Zodameranu. Odo cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe Saitan! 

(English) 

O ye swords of the South, which have eyes to stir up the wrath of sin, making men drunken 
which are empty; Behold! the promise of Satan and His power, which is called amongst ye a 
bitter sting! Move and appear! Unveil the mysteries of your creation! For I am the servant of 
the same, your God, the true worshipper of the highest and ineffable King of Hell! 

THE FOURTEENTH KEY 

The Fourteenth Enochian Key is a call for vengeance and the manifestation of justice. 

(Enochian) 

Noroni bajihie pasahasa Oiada! das tarinuta mireca ol tahila dodasa tolahame caosago 
/zomida: das berinu orocahe quare: Micama! Bial! Oiad; aisaro toxa das ivame aai Balatima. 
Zodacare od Zodameranu! Od cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe 
Saitan! 



(English) 



O ye sons and daughters of mildewed minds, that sit in judgement of the iniquities wrought 
upon me - Behold! the voice of Satan; the promise of Him who is called amongst ye the 
accuser and supreme tribune! Move therefore, and appear! Open the mysteries of your 
creation! Be friendly unto me, for I am the same!, the true worshipper of the highest and 
ineffable King of Hell! 



THE FIFTEENTH KEY 

The Fifteenth Enochian Key is a resolution of acceptance and understanding of the masters 
whose duty lies in administering to the seekers after spiritual gods. 

(Enochian) 

Ilasa! tabaanu li-El pereta, casaremanu upaahi cahisa dareji; das oado caosaji oresacore: das 
omaxa monasaci Baeouibe od emerajisa Iaiadix. Zodacare od Zodameranu! Odo cicale Qaa. 
Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe Saitan! 

(English) 

O thou, the governor of the first flame, under whose wings are the spinners of cobwebs that 
weave the Earth with dryness; that knowest the great name "righteousness" and the seal of 
false honor. Move therefore, and appear! Open the mysteries of your creation! Be friendly 
unto me, for I am the same!, the true worshipper of the highest and ineffable King of Hell! 



THE SIXTEENTH KEY 

The Sixteenth Enochian Key gives recognition of the wondrous contrasts of the earth, and of 
the sustenance of these dichotomies. 

(Enochian) 

Ilasa viviala pereta! Salamanu balata, das acaro odazodi busada, od belioraxa balita: das inusi 
caosaji lusadanu emoda: das ome od taliobe: darilapa iehe ilasa Mada Zodilodarepe. Zodacare 
od Zodameranu. Odo cicale Qaa: zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe Saitan! 

(English) 

O thou second flame, the house of justice, which hast thy beginnings in glory and shalt 
comfort the just; which walketh upon the Earth with feet of fire; which understands and 
separates creatures! Great art thou in the God of stretch- forth- and- conquer. Move therefore, 
and appear! Open the mysteries of your creation! Be friendly unto me, for I am the same!, the 
true worshipper of the highest and ineffable King of Hell! 



THE SEVENTEENTH KEY 



The Seventeenth Enochian Key is used to enlighten the benumbered and destroy through 
revelation. 

(Enochian) 

Ilasa dial pereta! soba vaupaahe cahisa nanuba zodixalayo dodasihe od berinuta f axis a hubaro 
tasataxa yolasa: soba lad i Vonupehe o Uonupehe: aladonu dax ila od toatare! Zodacare od 
Zodameranu! Odo cicale Qaa! Zodoreje, lape zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe Saitan! 

(English) 

O thou third flame!, whose wings are thorns to stir up vexation, and who hast myriad living 
lamps going before thee; whose God is wrath in anger - Gird up thy loins and harken! Move 
therefore, and appear! Open the mysteries of your creation! Be friendly unto me, for I am the 
same!, the true worshipper of the highest and ineffable King of Hell! 



THE EIGHTEENTH KEY 

The Eighteenth Enochian Key opens the gates of Hell and casts up Lucifer and his blessing. 

(Enochian) 

Ilasa micalazoda olapireta ialpereji beliore: das odo Busadire Oiad ouoaresa caosago: 
casaremeji Laiada eranu berinutasa cafafame das ivemeda aqoso adoho Moz, od maoffasa. 
Bolape como belioreta pamebeta. Zodacare od Zodameranu! Odo cicale Qaa. Zodoreje, lape 
zodiredo Noco Mada, hoathahe Saitan! 

(English) 

O thou mighty light and burning flame of comfort!, that unveilest the glory of Satan to the 
center of the Earth; in whom the great secrets of truth have their abiding; that is called in thy 
kingdom: "strength through joy", and is not to be measured. Be thou a window of comfort 
unto me. Move therefore, and appear! Open the mysteries of your creation! Be friendly unto 
me, for I am the same!, the true worshipper of the highest and ineffable King of Hell! 

THE NINETEENTH KEY 

The Nineteenth Enochian Key is the great sustainer of the natural balance of the earth, the law 
of thrift, and of the jungle. It lays bare all hypocrisy and the sanctimonious shall become as 
slaves under it. It brings forth the greatest outpouring of wrath upon the miserable, and lays 
the foundation of success for the lover of life. 

(Enochian) 

Madaritza das perifa LIL cahisa micaolazoda saanire caosago od fifisa balzodizodarasa Iaida. 
Nonuca gohulime: Micama adoianu MADA faoda beliorebe, soba ooaona cahisa luciftias 
peripesol, das aberaasasa nonucafe netaaibe caosaji od tilabe adapehaheta damepelozoda, 



tooata nonucafe jimicalazodoma larasada tofejilo marebe yareyo IDOIGO, od torezodulape 
yaodafe gohola, Caosaga, tabaoreda saanire, od caharisateosa yorepoila tiobela busadire, 
tilabe noalanu paida oresaba, od dodaremeni zodayolana. Elazodape tilaba paremeji 
peripesatza, od ta qurelesata booapisa. Lanibame oucaho sayomepe, od caharisateosa 
ajitolorenu, mireca qo tiobela lela. Tonu paomebeda dizodalamo asa pianu, od caharisateosa 
aji-la-tore-torenu paracahe a sayomepe. Coredazodizoda dodapala od fifalazoda, lasa manada, 
od faregita bamesa omaosa. Conisabera od auauotza tonuji oresa; catabela noasami tabejesa 
leuitahemonuji. Vanucahi omepetilabe oresa! Bahile? Moooabe OL coredazodizoda. El 
capimao itzomatzipe, od cacocasabe gosaa. Bajilenu pii tianuta a babalanuda, od faoregita 
teloca uo uime. 

Madariatza, torezodu !!! Oadariatza orocaha aboaperi! Tabaori periazoda aretabasa! 
Adarepanu coresata dobitza! Yolacame periazodi arecoazodiore, od quasabe qotinuji! Ripire 
paaotzata sagacore! Umela od peredazodare cacareji Aoiveae coremepeta! Torezodu! 
Zodacare od Zodameranu, asapeta sibesi butamona das surezodasa Tia balatanu. Odo cicale 
Qaa, od Ozodazodama pelapeli IADANAMADA! 

(English) 

O ye pleasures which dwell in the first air, ye are mighty in the parts of the Earth, and execute 
the judgment of the mighty. Unto you it is said: Behold the face of Satan, the beginning of 
comfort, whose eyes are the brightness of the stars, which provided you for the government of 
the Earth, and her unspeakable variety; furnishing you a power of understanding to dispose all 
things according to the providence of Him that sitteth on the Infernal Throne, and rose up in 
the Beginning saying: The Earth, let her be governed by her parts; and let there be division in 
her; the glory of her may be always drunken and vexed in itself. Her course, let it run with the 
fulfillment of lust; and as an handmaiden, let her serve them. One season, let it confound 
another; and let there be no creature upon or within her the same. All her numbers, let them 
differ in their qualities; and let there be no creature equal with another. The reasonable 
creatures of the Earth, and Men, let them vex and weed out one another; and their dwelling 
places, let them forget their names. The work of Man and his pomp, let them be defaced. His 
buildings, let them become caves for the beasts of the field! Confound her understanding with 
darkness! For why? it repenteth me that I have made Man. One while let her be known, and 
another while a stranger; because she is in the bed of a harlot, and the dwelling place of 
Lucifer the King. 

Open wide the gates of Hell! The lower heavens beneath you, let them serve you! Govern 
those who govern! Cast down such as fall. Bring forth those that increase, and destroy the 
rotten. No place, let it remain in one number. Add and diminish until the stars be numbered. 
Arise! Move! and appear before the covenant of His mouth, which He hath sworn unto us in 
His justice. Open the mysteries of your creation, and make us partakers of the undefiled 

WISDOM. 



YANKEE ROSE 



Underground Edition Extras 

The Satanic Bible Dedications Delineated 

Fragments of an Anton Szandor LaVey Reading List 

"Satanism" Monograph, 1968-69 

The Command to Look 

"The Book of Satan" from the Satanic Bible 

The Hidden Source of the Satanic Philosophy 

Photo Gallery 

Colophon 



The Satanic Bible Dedications Delineated 

Stephen E. Flowers, Ph.D., V° Temple of Set 
from Lords of the Left-Hand Path 
Runa-Raven Press, Smithville, Texas, 1997 

Essential to the nature of the myth of any figure such as Anton LaVey are the influences which 
shaped that figure's thought and action. LaVey himself provided a core list of such influences on 
his thought on the dedication page of the original printings of his Satanic Bible. It is telling that in 
more recent printings of the book this page has been omitted. 

On that list appear 19 primary personages, with 20 more given a sort of "honorable mention". 
There is also one animal, Togare, LaVey 's famous pet lion, and the Nine Unknown Men. [Almost 
70 other names appeared in a similar list in his Satanic Rituals book. These too have been removed 
in recent printings.] Space does not permit me to discuss each one of these personages in any detail, 
but the primary list is extremely important to understanding LaVey 's Satanic philosophy. 

The 19 primary men are (in the order he listed them): Bernardino Logara, Karl Haushofer, 
Grigory Yefimovitch Rasputin, Sir Basil Zaharoff, Allesandro Cagliostro, Barnabas Saul, Ragnar 
Redbeard, William Mortensen, Hans Brick, Max Reinhardt, Orrin Klapp, Fritz Lang, Friedrich 
Nietzsche, William Claude Dukinfield, Phineas Taylor Barnum, Hans Poelzig, Reginald Marsh, 
Wilhelm Reich, and Mark Twain. After the names of each of these, LaVey characterizes them with 
a dedicatory phrase. These are given in quotation marks in the discussions below. 

Bernadino Logara, "who knew the value of money", unidentified, presumably a manipulative 
banker or financier. 

Karl Haushofer (1869-1946), "a teacher without a classroom", was the founder of the theory of 
"geopolitics" and a professor of geography at the University of Munich. He was sympathetic with 
National Socialism and exerted influence on its ideology, especially through one of his students, 
Rudolf Hess. However LaVey' s image and admiration of him comes through the modem 
mythologizing contained in The Morning of the Magicians, in which the authors have Haushofer 
involved in various occult goings-on in Tibet and with the infamous Thule Gesellschaft of Rudolf 
von Sebottendorf. There is, however, no evidence for these more "occultnik" connections. 

Rasputin (1872-1916), "who knew the magic of a child", was much admired by LaVey because 
he saw the Russian "mad monk" as a lusty manipulator of people (especially women) and power - 
all traits pursued by LaVey himself. But Rasputin was not likely to have had anything really 
"Satanic" about him. LaVey was most certainly inspired by more lurid accounts of Rasputin - and 
by the film Rasputin: The Mad Monk (Hammer, 1965). 

Sir Basil Zaharoff (1850-1936), "a gentleman", was an arms merchant who sold weaponry and 
encouraged his customers to use their purchases -all while not only becoming wealthy but being 
knighted by the King of England too ! 



The "secondary" dedication names: Howard Hughes, James Moody (CS member), Marcello Truzzi (Sociology 
professor), Adrian-Claude Frazier (real name Charles Steenbarger, CS), Marilyn Monroe, Wesley Mather (CS), 
William Lindsay Gresham, Hugo Zacchini ("Human Cannonball" circus performer), Jayne Mansfield, Frederick 
Goerner, C.Huntley (CS), Nathaniel West, Horatio Alger [the juxtaposition of these two is intentionally ironic, since 
West in A Cool Million satirized Alger], Robert E. Howard, George Orwell, H.P. Lovecraft, Tuesday Weld, H.G 
Wells, Sister Marie Koven (CS), Harry Houdini, Togare, and the Nine Unknown Men. - M.A.A. 



Cagliostro (1743-1791), "a rogue", was the assumed name of an Italian magician and alchemist 
named Guiseppe Balsamo. He billed himself as a "Count" and the "Grand Kophta of the Egyptian 
Lodge", but what was less known was that he had been expelled from several countries due to his 
fraudulent dealings. He was popular with the people and a supporter of revolution, but ended his 
life in the dungeons of Pope Pius VI. 

Barnabas Saul was the first "server", or medium, employed by the Elizabethan mage John Dee 
(1527-1608). After leaving Dee's service, Saul disavowed his visions. 

Ragnar Redbeard (18427-1926?), "whose might is right", is a story unto himself. "Redbeard" 
was perhaps the pseudonym of Arthur Desmond, an atheist and social Darwinist street-philosopher 
from whose book, entitled Might is Right LaVey lifted whole sections to create the "Book of Satan" 
portion of the Satanic Bible. 

William Mortensen, "who looked ... and saw", wrote a photographers' manual entitled The 
Command to Look (1937). The psycho-optical theories contained in it greatly influenced LaVey's 
approach to art and to images and the way they can influence the human mind. It must be 
considered a keystone to LaVeyan Satanism. 

Hans Brick, "who knows the law", wrote a book entitled The Nature of the Beast (1960) which 
was a formative influence on the formulation of LaVey's social philosophy, especially as contained 
in the Lex Talonis or "Eleven Rules of the Earth". 

Max Reinhardt (1873-1943), "a builder of dreams", was born Max Goldman in Austria and 
became famous as a theatrical director who specialized in staging huge spectacles. 

Orrin Klapp (b. 1915), "the walking man", is a sociologist whose works Heroes, Villains and 
Fools (1962) and The Collective Search for Identity (1969) were greatly influential on LaVey's 
ideas of social movements and change. 

Fritz Lang (1890-1976), "who made moving blueprints", was an Austrian film director who 
made such classics as Metropolis (1926) and M (1930). 

Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900), "a realist", was a German philosopher and forerunner to the 
existentialists. His ideas of the overman (or "superman") and the "will to power", as well as his 
ideas concerning the existence of natural "masters" and "slaves", are greatly admired by modern 
philosophical Satanists. 

W.C. Fields (1880-1946), "who saved me a journey to Tibet", was the stage-name of William 
C. Dukinfield. 

P.T. Barnum (1810-1891), "another great guru", was the American showman famous for his 
exhibits of freaks and establishment of circuses. Barnum' s supposed basic philosophy - "There's a 
sucker born every minute" -was taken to heart by LaVey and used as a mainstay of his worldview. 

Hans Poelzig (1869-1936), "who knew all the angles", was a German architect who specialized 
in grandiose and imaginative structures. An example is the Grand Theater in Berlin, also called the 
Max Reinhardt Theater (1919). He was also the set designer for The Golem (Deutsche Bioscop, 
1914). 

Reginald Marsh (1898-1954), "a great artist", was an illustrator, scene designer, and painter of 
gritty street scenes, greatly admired by LaVey, who is himself a painter of unusual subjects. 

Wilhelm Reich (1897-1957), "who knew more than cabinet making", was a German 
psychologist who held that there was a material force called "orgone" which worked in conjunction 
with the human orgasm. This force could also be collected in "cabinets" called "orgone 
accumulators". 

Mark Twain (1835-1910), "a very brave man", was the pen name of Samuel Langhorn 
Clemens, the great American writer. LaVey much admires Twain for his works Letters from the 
Earth (1962) and The Mysterious Stranger (1969). In an early Church of Satan document, LaVey 
praises Twain as "one of the greatest of the Devil's advocates in history" and as "the most noble 
embodiment of the Satanist". 

This list of influences provides invaluable insight into the formation of LaVey's philosophy and 
outlook on life. Of the 16 identifiable men fully half of them are artists of one kind or another. Of 
these, five dealt with the creation of visual imagery and two, W.C. Fields and P.T. Barnum, were 
best known as "trickster" figures. The idealization of image makers should provide some clue as to 
the true nature of LaVey's philosophy and magic. 



That most of LaVey's ideas are not original, and that his philosophy is largely made up of bits 
and pieces of the philosophies of others which he recomposed according to his own tastes and style 
- unique to himself and to his time - might also be said of some of the other subjects in Lords of the 
Left-Hand Path. We could say the same of every one who ever created a religion, whether Gautama 
the Buddha or Gerald Gardner. What makes LaVey somewhat unusual in this respect is that he 
often seems to insist on the idea that he invented a way of thinking, that his Satanism is something 
akin to a product upon which he has a "copyright" of some sort. But more remarkable than the idea 
that LaVey invented his Satanism out of bits and pieces of obscure philosophies is the fact that he 
actually invented himself out of the depths of his own mind ... 



Fragments of an Anton Szandor LaVey Reading List 

Mostly culled from a late 1980s Temple of Set reading list 
and The Compleat Witch 's bibliography; text in quotes is ASL 

LaVey's Works 

The Satanic Bible by Anton Szandor LaVey. NY: Avon Books #NS44, 1969. 
Hardcover edition from University Books, 1972. 

The Compleat Witch by Anton Szandor LaVey. NY: Dodd, Mead & Company, 1970. 
This book has been republished in paperback under the name The Satanic Witch in 1989. 

The Satanic Rituals by Anton Szandor LaVey. NY: Avon Books #W359, 1972. 
Hardcover edition from University Books, 1972. 

The Devil's Notebookby Anton Szandor LaVey. Los Angeles: Feral House 0-922915-11-3, 1992. 
Satan Speaks! by Anton Szandor LaVey. Los Angeles: Feral House 0-922915-66-0, 1998. 
Satanism 

The Satanic Mass by H.T.F. Rhodes. London: Jarrold's Publishers Ltd, 1968. 

"A non-hysterical account by a criminologist who has researched his subject well." 

Witchcraft: Its Power in the World Today by William Seabrook. NY: Lancer Books #78656, 1968. 
"Witchcraft discussed in terms of suggestive psychology." 

The Second Coming: Satanism in America by Arthur Lyons. NY: Dodd, Mead, 1970. 
"Discusses our Church from an objective standpoint, shows how the media have maligned our 
Order, and gives concise comparisons with the beliefs of some of the 'Satanic cults'." 

Rasputin by Colin Wilson. London: Panther Books, 1966. 
"An insight into the workings of a truly Satanic magician." 

The Circus of Dr. Lao by Charles G. Finney. NY: Viking Press, 1935 
[reprinted paperback: Avon #19190, 1974]. 

"A tale that tells it all; every human foible is dissected. It is the epic of man's desire and futility: 
Zarathustra under canvas - an excursion to the highest Llamasery of the Red Monks for those who 
can read it." 

The Church of Satan by Michael A. Aquino. Fifth Edition, 2002. Retrieved November 8, 2006 from 
http://www.xeper.org/maquino/nm/COS.pdf 

History of the CoS from its founding until 1975. Many primary sources and appendices. 

Hollywood Babylon (San Francisco: Straight Arrow Books, 1975) and Hollywood Babylon II (NY: 
New American Library, 1984) by Kenneth Anger. 

Anger is an 'underground film maker' who became fascinated with Aleister Crowley and with 
Anton LaVey during the early days of the Church of Satan. 

History 

A History of Secret Societies by Arkon Daraul. NY: Citadel Press, 1961. 
"A fine essay on the subject, with objectivity and much attention to detail." 



Occultism 



The Morning of the Magicians by Louis Pauwels and Jacques Bergier. NY: Avon Books, 1968. 
"First and best work ever done describing the Satanic influence in the world." 

The Black Arts by Richard Cavendish. NY: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1968. 
"Good basic primer on the subject." 

A Fascinating History of Witchcraft, Magic, & Occultism by W.B. Crow. North Hollywood: 
Wilshire Book Co., 1970. 

"Has much new material of interest to Satanic scholars." 
H.P. Lovecraft 

The King in Yellow by Robert W. Chambers. NY: F. Tennyson Neely, 1895 (Dover paperback 
available). 

"First on my list, as it is the work of a writer of cheap romances who became daemonically 
possessed after being involved in espionage work of a delicate nature, the implications of which are 
still cycling. Chambers, in his literary emergence from the Impressionists of his day, cast a die for 
Lovecraft, Orwell, Huxley, and many others. Yes, the reading of The King in Yellow in its entirety 
CAN drive one mad, if one realizes the insidiousness of the thing." 

Lycanthropy 

Cult of the Cat by Patricia Dale Green. NY: Tower Publications, 1970 

[later reprinted as The Archetypal Cathy Spring Publications, Dallas, TX]. 

"Without question the most enlightening book yet written on the relationship of the cat to 

Satanism." 

Man Into Wolf by Robert Eisner. NY: Philosophical Library, 1951 (republished Santa Barbara: 
Ross-Erikson, Inc., 1978). 

Highly regarded by Anton LaVey as a psychological analysis of lycanthropy, this work is an 
anthropologically-based treatment of sadism, masochism, and lycanthropy. 

The Golden Dawn 

The Rites of Modern Occult Magic (British title: Ritual Magic in England) by Francis King. NY: 
Macmillan, 1970. 

"A comprehensive survey of the Golden Dawn and other magical orders. Contains more actual, no- 
nonsense information than can be gleaned from the ponderous writings of the orders covered." 

Sex Magic 

Odoratus Sexualis by Iwan Block. North Hollywood: Brandon House, 1967. 
"The use of odors in magic." 

Magica Sexualis by Emile Laurent and Paul Nagour. North Hollywood: Brandon House, 1966. 
"Contains some little-known lore." 

Good and Evil 

The Social Contract by Robert Audrey. NY: Atheneum, 1970. 

"The Law of the Jungle as applied to human behavior. How the fallacy of 'all men are created 
equal' has created an imbalance - perhaps necessary - in man's potential. A beautifully written book 
guaranteed to hurt many whose only claim to fame is that they are 'higher animals'." 



Collective Search for Identity by Orrin E. Klapp. NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1969. 
"A useful key to the understanding and utilization of Lesser Magic." 

Heroes, Villains, and Fools by Orrin E. Klapp. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1962. 
"Same comments as [above]." 

Intellectual Evolution 

The Psychology of Man's Possible Evolution by Peter D. Ouspensky. NY: Alfred A. Knopf, 1969. 
"Should be read especially by those members whose magical ability is hampered by flaws in their 
balance factor." 

Behavior Control by Perry London. NY: Harper & Row, 1969. 

"A Satanic glimpse into the very near future. As this book was too hot for most markets, it might be 
difficult to obtain." 

The Myth of Mental Illness by Thomas S. Szasz. NY: Dell Publishing Co., 1961. 

"A scathing indictment against the Judaeo/Christian glorification of weakness and inadequacy 

which has fostered the psychic vampire. A fine book by a courageous writer." 

Time, Space and the Future 

Man and Time by J.B. Priestley. NY: Crescent Books, 1964. 

"A beautifully done book which explains many sound theories of space and time. Very usable 
information." 

The Last Days by Anthony Hunter. London: Anthony Blond Ltd, 1958. 

"A fairly scarce work from England which explains the workings of the prophets of doom who prey 
upon their followers' fears that the world will end, tidal waves, earthquakes, etc." 

Bibliography from The Compleat Witch 

Anonymous, Chorus Queens, Or The Private Lives of Broadway Hotcha Chorus Girls. 
Detroit: Johnson Smith, 1937. 

Anonymous, The Confessions of a Taxi-Dancer. Detroit: Johnson Smith & Co., 1938. 
Anonymous (Robert Kramer, Ed.), The Horn Book. North Hollywood: Brandon House, 1967. 
Arthur, Gavin, The Circle of Sex. San Francisco: Pan Graphic Press, 1962. 
Baines, Anthony, Musical Instruments Through the Ages. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1961. 
Barker, J.C., Scared to Death. New York: Dell Publishing Co., 1969. 

Bauer, W.W., Potions, Remedies and Old Wives' Tales. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1969. 

Becker, Stephen, Comic Art in America. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1959. 

Bedichek, Roy, The Sense of Smell. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1960. 

Berman, Louis, New Creations in Human Beings. New York: Doubleday, Doran & Co., 1938. 

Bessy, Maurice, Pictorial History of Magic and the Supernatural. London: Spring Books, 1964. 

Birnbaum, Henri, Love and Love's Philosophy. New York: Pageant Press, 1955. 

Birren, Faber, Color: A Survey in Words and Pictures. New York: University Books, 

1963. 

, Color in Your World. New York: Crowell-Collier Publishing Co., 1962. 

, Color Psychology and Color Therapy. New York: University Books, 1950-1961. 

Blackford, Katherine M.H., Reading Character at Sight. New York: Independent 
Corporation, 1918. 

Bloch, Iwan, Odoratus Sexualis. North Hollywood: Brandon House, 1967. 

, The Sexual Life of our Time. New York: Allied Book Co., 1926. 

Bodin, Walter and Hershey, Burnet, It's a Small World. New York: Coward-McCann, 1934. 
Boss, Medard, The Analysis of Dreams. London: Rider, 1957. 



Bourke, John G., Scatalogic Rites of All Nations. Washington, D.C.: W.H. Lowdermilk & Co., 
1891. 

Brick, Hans, The Nature of the Beast. New York: Crown Publishers, 1960. 
Budge, E.A. Wallis, Amulets and Talismans. New York: University Books, 1961. 
Bulliet, C.J., Venus Castina. New York: Bonanza Books, 1928 & 1956. 
Bunker, M.N., Handwriting Analysis: The Art and Science of Reading Character by 
Grapho Analysis. Chicago: Nelson-Hall Co., 1959. 

Byfield, Barbara Ninde, The Glass Harmonica. New York: Macmillian Co., 1967. 

Cameron, Ian & Elisabeth, Dames. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1969. 

Carrington, Hereward, The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 

1920. 

Carson, Gerald, One for a Man, Two for a Horse. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1961. 
Cauldwell, David O., Transvestism - Men in Female Dress. New York: Sexology Corp., 1956. 
Cavendish, Richard, The Black Arts. New York: Capricorn Books, 1968. 
Clarens, Carlos, An Illustrated History of the Horror Film. New York: G.P. Putnam's 
Sons, 1967. 

Cohen, Daniel, Myths of the Space Age. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1965. 
Collyer, Martin, Burlesque. New York: Lancer Books, 1964. 
Corinda, Thirteen Steps to Mentalism. New York: Louis Tannen, 1968. 

Crow, W.B., A History of Magic, Witchcraft and Occultism. North Hollywood: Wilshire Book Co., 
1970. 

Dannett, Sylvia G.L. & Rachel, Frank R., Down Memory Lane. New York: Greenberg Publisher, 
1954. 

Darwin, Charles, The Expressions of the Emotions in Man and in Animals. London: 
Murray, 1873. 

Davenport, John, Aphrodisiacs and Love Stimulants. London: Luxor Press, 1965. 

de Leeuw, Hendrik, Women - the Dominant Sex. New York: Thomas Yoseloff, 1957. 

Deren, Maya, Divine Horsemen: The Voodoo Gods of Haiti. New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 

1970. 

Deutsch, Helene, The Psychology of Women. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1944. 

Dingwall, Eric John, The American Woman - A Historical Study. New York: Rinehart & Co., 1956. 

Durant, John & Alice, A Pictorial History of the American Circus. New York: A.S. 

Barnes & Co., 1957. 

Efron, David, Gesture and Environment. London: King's Crown Press, 1941. 

Eisler, Robert, Man Into Wolf. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1951. 

Ellis, Albert, The Folklore of Sex. New York: Charles Boni, 1951. 

Ellis, Havelock, Psychology of Sex. New York: Emerson Books, 1946. 

Ellis, Julie, Revolt of the Second Sex. New York: Lancer Books, 1970. 

Elworthy, Frederick Thomas, The Evil Eye. New York: Julian Press, 1958. 

Evans, Bergen, The Natural History of Nonsense. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1946. 

Feldman, Sandor S., Mannerisms of Speech and Gestures in Everyday Life. New York: 

International Universities, 1959. 

Fere, Charles Sampson, The Sexual Urge - How it Grows or Wanes. New York: Falstaff Press, 
1932. 

Ferenczi, Sandor, Further Contributions to the Theory and Technique ofPsycho- 

Analysis. London: Hogarth Press, 1926. 

, Sex in Psycho- Analysis. New York, Dover, 1956. 

Fielding, William J., Strange Superstitions and Magical Practices. Philadelphia: The 
Blackiston Co., 1945. 

Fiske, John, Myths and Myth-Makers. Boston: Houghton Mifflin & Co., 1897. 
Flugel, J.C., The Psychology of Clothes. New York: International Universities Press, 1969. 
Freud, Sigmund, A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis. New York: Liveright 
Publishing Co., 1935. 

Fosbroke, Gerald Elton, Character Reading Through Analysis of the Features. New York: G.P. 
Putnam's Sons, 1933. 



Garland, Madge, The Changing Face of Beauty. New York: M. Barrows & Co., 1957. 
Gibson, Walter B. & Litzka, R., The Complete Illustrated Book of the Psychic Sciences. 
New York: Doubleday, 1966. 

Gifford, Edward S. Jr., The Charms of Love. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1962. 
- - -, The Evil Eye. New York: Macmillan Co., 1958. 

Gindes, Bernard C, New Concepts of Hypnosis. New York: Julian Press, 1951. 
Goffman, Erving, Behavior in Public Places. New York: Free Press, 1963. 

, Interaction Ritual. New York: Anchor Books - Doubleday & Co., 1967. 

, Stigma. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1963. 

Gould, George M. & Pyle, Walter L., Anomalies and Curiosities of Medicine. New York: Julian 
Press, 1956. 

Gowland, Peter, How to Photograph Women. New York: Crown Publishers, 1953. 
Gray, Frank, Scoremanship. New York: Bantam Books, 1969. 
Gresham, William Lindsay, Monster Midway. New York: Rinehart & Co., 1948. 
Grollman, Arthur, Essentials of Endocrinology . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Co., 1941. 
Habenstein, Robert W. & Lamers, William M., Funeral Customs the World Over. 
Milwaukee: Bulfin Printers, 1960. 

Hadfield, J.A., Dreams and Nightmares. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1954. 

Hall, Edward T., The Silent Language. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1959. 

Hall, Edward T., The Hidden Dimension. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1966. 

Herman, Lewis and Shalett, Marguerite, Foreign Dialects. New York: Theater Arts Book, 1943. 

Holder, Robert, You Can Analyze Handwriting. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1958. 

Hoskins, R.G., Endocrinology - The Glands and Their Functions . New York: W.W. 

Norton & Co., 1941. 

Hunt, Morton M., The Natural History of Love. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1959. 

Keats, John, The Insolent Chariots. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Co., 1958. 

Klapp, Orrin E., Collective Search for Identity. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston, 1969. 

, Heroes, Villains and Fools. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1962. 

, Symbolic Leaders. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Co., 1964. 

Kohler, Carl, A History of Costume. New York: Dover Publications, 1963. 

Kretshmer, E., Physique and Character. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1925. 

Lariar, Lawrence, Cartooning for Everybody. New York: Crown Publishers, 1941. 

Laurent, Emile and Nagour, Paul, Magica Sexualis. North Hollywood: Brandon House, 1966. 

LaVey, Anton Szandor, The Satanic Bible. New York: Avon Books, 1969. 

Legman, Gershon, The Horn Book. New York: University Books, 1964. 

Leigh, Michael, The Velvet Underground. New York: Macfadden-Bartell Corp., 1963. 

Lofland, John, Deviance and Identity. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1969. 

London, Perry, Behavior Control. New York: Harper & Row, 1969. 

Luckiesh, M., Visual Illusions - Their Cause, Characteristics, and Applications . New 

York: Dover Publications, 1965. 

Mangels, William F., The Outdoor Amusement Industry . New York: Vantage Press, 1952. 
Mannix, Dan, Step Right Up! New York: Harper & Brothers, 1950. 
Maslow, Abraham H., Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper & Row, 1954. 
Masters, R.E.L., Eros and Evil. New York: Matrix House Publishers, 1966. 
McCullough, Edo, Good Old Coney Island. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1957. 
McGrady, Patrick M. Jr., The Youth Doctors. New York: Ace Publishing Corp., 1969. 
McLuhan, Herbert Marshall, The Mechanical Bride. New York: Vanguard Press, 1951. 
Meerloo, Joost A., The Dance. Philadelphia: Chilton Company, 1960. 
Milner, Michael, Sex on Celluloid. New York: Macfadden-Bartell Corp., 1964. 
Mobius, Felix, Zauberei Gerauschen. Leipzig: Koehler, 1936. 
Morris, Desmond, The Naked Ape. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967. 

Mortensen, William, The Command to Look. San Francisco: Camera Craft Publishing Co., 1937. 

Nelms, Henning, Magic and Showmanship. New York: Dover Publications, 1969. 

Nemecek, Otto Kar, Virginity, Pre-Nuptial Rites and Rituals. New York: Philosophical Library, 

1958. 



Nierenburg, Gerald I., The Art of Negotiating. New York: Hawthorn Books, 1968. 
Ostow, Mortimer and Scharfstein, Ben- Ami, The Need to Believe. New York: International 
Universities Press, 1954. 

Packard, Vance, The Hidden Persuaders. New York: David McKay Co., 1957. 

Pauwels, Louis and Bergier, Jacques, The Morning of the Magicians. New York: Stein & Day, 

1964. 

Pilat, Oliver and Ranson, Jo, Sodom by the Sea. Garden City: Garden City Publishing Co., 1943. 

Podolski, Edward, Music Therapy. New York: Philosophical Library, 1954. 

Poinsot, M.C., The Encyclopedia of Occult Sciences. New York: Robert McBride & Co., 1939. 

Priestly, J.B., Man and Time. New York: Crescent Books, 1964. 

Quinsel, Reinhart, Sexual Exhibitionism. New York: Award Books, 1968. 

Rawcliffe, D.H., The Psychology of the Occult. London: Derricke Ridgway Publishing Co., 1952. 
Reich, Wilhelm, Character Analysis. New York: Orgone Institute Press, 1949. 

, The Function of the Orgasm. New York: Orgone Institute Press, 1942. 

Rhodes, H.T.F., The Satanic Mass. New York: Citadel Press, 1955. 

Riordan, Judson, Peeping Tom. New York: Venice Publishing Co., 1967. 

Robbins, Russell Hope, The Encyclopedia of Witchcraft and Demonology. NY: Crown 

Publishers, 1963. 

Rogers, Agnes, Women Are Here To Stay. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1949. 
Rogers, J.A., Sex and Race [Vols. I (1940) & II (1942)]. New York: JA. Rogers 
Publications. 

Rose, Elliott, A Razor for a Goat. Canada: University of Toronto Press, 1962. 
Rosenteur, Phyllis I., Morpheus and Me. New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1957. 
Rubington, Earl and Weinberg, Martin S., Deviance - the Interactionist Perspective. New York: 
Macmillan Co., 1968. 

Rule, Lareina, Name Your Baby. New York: Bantam Books, 1963. 

Sagarin, Edward, The Anatomy of Dirty Words. New York: Lyle Stuart, 1962. 

, The Science and Art of Perfumery. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1945. 

Samstag, Nicholas, The Uses of Ineptitude or How not to want to do Better. NY: Ivan 
Obolensky, 1962. 

Scheimann, Eugene & Neimark, Paul, Sex and the Overweight Woman. New York: Signet Books, 
1970. 

Seabrook, William, Witchcraft, Its Power in the World Today. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 
1940. 

Sheldon, W.H., Atlas of Men. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1954. 

, The Varieties of Human Physique. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1940. 

, The Varieties of Temperament. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1942. 

Sigaud, C, La Forme Humaine. Paris: A. Maloine, 1914. 

Sobel, Bernard, A Pictorial History of Burlesque. New York: Bonanza Books, 1956. 
Sprenger, Jakob and Kramer, Heinrich (Montague Summers, trans.), Malleus 
Maleficarum. London: Pushkin Press, 1948. 

Stanislavski, Constantin (Elizabeth R. Hapgood trans.), An Actor Prepares. New York: Theatre 
Arts, 1936. 

Steinach, Eugen, Sex and Life. New York: Viking Press, 1940. 
Stekel, Wilhelm, Bi-Sexual Love. New York: Emerson Books, 1945. 

, The Interpretation of Dreams. New York: Liveright Publishing Corp., 1943. 

, Patterns of Psychosexual Infantilism. New York: Liveright Publishing Corp., 1952. 

Szasz, Kathleen, Petishism - Pets and their People in the Western World. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1968. 

Tabori, Paul, The Art of Folly. New York: Chilton Co., 1961. 

, The Book of the Hand. New York: Chilton Co., 1962. 

, The Natural Science of Stupidity. New York: Chilton Co., 1959. 

Thetard, Henry, La Merveilleuse Histoire Du Cirque. Paris: S. Guida- Prisma, 1947. 
Thigpen, Corbett H., The Three Faces of Eve. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957. 
Thompson, C.J.S., The Mystery and Lore of Monsters. New York: Macmillan Co., 1931. 



Thouless, Robert H., Straight and Crooked Thinking. London: Hodder & Stoughton, 
1930. 

Tridon, Andre, Psychoanalysis and Love. New York: Permabooks, 1949. 
Truzzi, Marcello, Caldron Cookery. New York: Meredith Press, 1969. 

, Sociology and Everyday Life. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1968. 

Turner, E.S., A History of Courting. New York: E.P. Dutton & Co., 1954. 

Vernon, Jack, Inside the Black Room. New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1963. 

Volta, Ornella, The Vampire. London: Tandem Books, 1965. 

Wagner, Geoffrey, Parade of Pleasure. London: Derek Verschoyle, 1954. 

Wall, OA., Sex and Sex Worship (Phallic Worship). St. Louis: C.V. Mosby Co., 1922. 

Walton, Alan Hull, Aphrodisiacs - from Legend to Prescription. New York: Associated 

Booksellers, 1958. 

Waterman, Philip F., The Story of Superstition. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1929. 
Wedeck, Harry E., Dictionary of Aphrodisiacs. New York: Philosophical Library, 1961. 

, Treasury of Witchcraft. New York: Philosophical Library, 1961. 

Weidenreich, F., Rasse und Korperbau. Berlin: Springer, 1926. 

Winick, Charles, The New People. New York: Pegasus, 1968. 

Wright, Lawrence, Clean and Decent. Canada: University of Toronto Press, 1967. 

X, Dr. Jacobus, Untrodden Fields of Anthropology. New York: American Anthropological Society, 

privately re-issued. 



"Satanism" Monograph, 1968-69 

Anton Szandor LaVey 

The following monograph, distributed in 1968-1969, was written to convey the essence of the 
Satanic religion as it was practiced by the Church of Satan in its earliest years. Much of the 
material in the monograph was later expanded into a series of twenty essays issued to Satanists as 
a study course. Both the original monograph and the essays derived from it were discontinued prior 
to the 1970 publication of the Satanic Bible because of that volume's incorporation of the essays in 
its "Books of Lucifer" and "Belial". This monograph, then, may be considered the original 
manifesto of the Church of Satan and hence its founding statement of principles. - MA. A. 

The Nine Satanic Statements 

1 Satan represents indulgence instead of abstinence! 

2 Satan represents vital existence instead of spiritual pipe dreams ! 

3 Satan represents undefiled wisdom instead of hypocritical self-deceit! 

4 Satan represents kindness to those who deserve it instead of love wasted on ingrates! 

5 Satan represents vengeance instead of turning the other cheek! 

6 Satan represents responsibility to the responsible instead of concern for psychic vampires! 

7 Satan represents man as just another animal - sometimes better, more often worse than those 
that walk on all-fours, who, because of his "divine spiritual and intellectual development," 
has become the most vicious animal of all! 

8 Satan represents all of the so-called sins, as they all lead to physical, mental, or emotional 
gratification! 

9 Satan has been the best friend the Church has ever had, as he has kept it in business all these 
years! 

Part I: Foreword 

In writing this monograph it is our intent to give you a basic understanding of the Satanic 
religion. Therefore we have attempted to present this to you in a form which will be easily 
understood. 

We fully realize that many of you who will read this booklet will not be novices to the basics of 
Satanism or the fundamentals of psychology which make up a large part of the Satanic philosophy. 

We are aware that to many of you part of the information herein is elementary. Therefore it is to 
be understood that there is no attempt on our part to be condescending to those to whom some of 
this information is already known. 

We realize, however, that probably many more of you know comparatively little about 
Satanism, except what little you have been able to decipher from the reams of ponderous material 
which is shrouded in so much esoteric jargon as to make it virtually useless to neophytes in Satanic 
theology. It is with this in mind that we have avoided delving into the finer points of Satanic 
thought and ritual magic. A complete statement of the tenets of Satanism and an explanation of the 
ceremonies and detailed instructions on same are available to our members. 

In the past the only writings on Satanism were those done by other religions as a means of 
propaganda to turn people against it, or by uninformed journalists who were influenced by the 
Judaeo-Christian society surrounding them. Therefore the information contained in such writings 
was either completely false or sensationalized. 

Our purpose is to enlighten you as to the true concepts of Satanism and to refute the myths 
attached to it. 

The "seven deadly sins" of the Christian church are greed, pride, envy, anger, gluttony, lust, and 
sloth. Satanism advocates indulging in each of these "sins", as they all lead to physical, mental, or 
emotional gratification. A Satanist feels there is nothing wrong with being greedy, as it only means 
that he wants more than he already has. Envy simply means to look with favor upon the possessions 
of others and to be desirous of obtaining similar things for oneself. Envy and greed are the 



motivating forces of ambition, and without ambition very little of any importance would be 
accomplished. 

Gluttony is simply eating more than you need to keep yourself alive. When you have over-eaten 
to the point of obesity, you will oftentimes resort to another sin -pride - to regain an appearance 
which will return your self-respect. Anyone who buys an article of clothing for a purpose other than 
covering his body and keeping off the elements is guilty of pride. You may encounter scoffers who 
maintain that labels are not necessary. You might find it an ego-satisfying little exercise to point out 
to these people that one or many articles that they are wearing are not necessary to keep them 
warm. There is not a person on this earth who is completely devoid of all ornamentation. You can 
inform the person that any ornamentation of his body shows that he too is guilty of pride. 
Regardless of how verbose he may be in his intellectual description of how free he is, he is still 
wearing the elements of pride. This thought may serve no other purpose for you than that of being a 
satisfying exercise in abuse of non-Satanists. 

Being reluctant to get up in the morning is to be guilty of sloth; and if you lie in bed long 
enough, you may find yourself indulging in yet another sin - lust. To have the faintest stirring of 
sexual desire is to be guilty of lust. In order to ensure the propagation of humanity, nature made lust 
the second most powerful instinct, the first being self-preservation. Realizing this, the Christian 
church made fornication the "original sin". In this way it made certain that no one would escape 
sin. Your very state of being is as a result of sin - the original sin! 

The strongest instinct of every living creature is self-preservation, which brings us to the last of 
the "seven deadly sins" -anger. Is it not our self-preservation instinct which is aroused when 
someone harms us and we become angry enough to protect ourselves from further attack? A 
Satanist practices the motto: "If a man smite thee on one cheek, smash him on the other!" Let no 
wrong go unredressed. Be as a lion in the path; be dangerous even in defeat! 

Since man's natural instincts lead him to sin, all men are sinners; and all sinners go to Hell. If 
everyone goes to Hell, then you will meet all of your friends there. Heaven must be populated by 
some very strange creatures if all they live for is to go to a place where they can strum harps for 
eternity. 

We have been told that Hell is a terrible place consisting of a huge lake of fire. Pleasure, like 
beauty, is in the eye of the beholder. Christian missionaries were very unsuccessful in Alaska 
because, to an Eskimo who knows nothing other than freezing weather, a perpetual lake of fire is 
very inviting. To the distress of the missionaries, the Eskimos asked, "How do we get there?" 

Hell has always been the mold from which Heaven has been cast. Heaven or Paradise, to most 
people, represents a vision of having their desires fulfilled . . . these very desires being those which, 
if practiced during their earthly lives, would certainly have sent them to Hell! 

Life is an indulgence, death an abstinence. For a person who is satisfied with his earthly 
existence, life is like a party, and no one likes to leave a good party. Similarly if a person is 
enjoying himself here on earth, he will not so readily give up his life for the promise of an afterlife 
about which he knows nothing. 

In most religions death is touted as a beautiful, spiritual awakening. This is very appealing to 
one who has not had a satisfactory life. But to those who have experienced all of the joys that life 
has to offer, there is a great dread attached to dying. This is as it should be. It is this lust for life that 
will allow the vital person to live on after the inevitable death of his fleshly shell. 

The only time an animal will resort to suicide is if he is in such pain or life is so unbearable that 
death comes as an indulgence rather than an abstinence. Suicide is considered a sin. It is rather 
curious that the only time death, for a human being, is considered sinful is when it comes as an 
indulgence. 

The four principal devils are: Leviathan, representing the sea; Lucifer, the lord of the air or 
bearer of light; Belial, the lord of the earth; and Satan, lord of the fire. 

One of the main goals of the Church of Satan is to build pleasure domes in which the members 
of the Church can indulge themselves in their personal desires. By having a place where they can 
go to release their desires, the members can lead an unfrustrated life in the everyday world. 
Satanism advocates indulgence, not compulsion. Compulsion is very different from indulgence. 
When a person cannot control his desires and is a slave to these urges, they become compulsions. If 
a person has no proper release for his desires, they rapidly build up and become compulsions. A 



pleasure dome would consist of many different rooms and recreational facilities for the purpose of 
fulfilling each member's personal desires. 

Satanism represents responsibility to the responsible instead of concern for psychic vampires. 
Satanism represents kindness to those who deserve it, instead of love wasted on ingrates. Psychic 
vampires are individuals who drain others of their vital existence. We might feel responsible to 
such people yet not know why. These types of persons can be found in all avenues of society. They 
fill no useful purpose in our lives and are neither love objects nor true friends. We must rid 
ourselves of these psychic vampires so that we can devote our time to the people about whom we 
truly care. Rituals which can be performed to rid ourselves of these people will be discussed later. 

The Satanist believes in fulfillment of the ego. Satanism, in fact, is the only religion which 
advocates the intensification or the encouragement of the ego. All other religions on the face of the 
Earth are concerned only with the dissolution of man's ego. Only if a person's ego is sufficiently 
fulfilled can he afford to be kind and complimentary to others without robbing himself of his self- 
respect. Braggarts are very insecure people. We generally think of a braggart as a person with a 
large ego, but in reality it is his unfulfilled ego which leads to his bragging as a means of satisfying 
his ego. 

To become a Satanist one does not have to "sell his soul to the Devil". This concept was 
developed by Christianity to terrorize people so that they would not stray from the fold. It was 
taught that if you gave in to the temptations of Satan and lived your life in an indulgent manner, 
you would have to pay Satan with your soul when you died. And what is the soul, as religionists 
would have it, but a passport to everlasting life? People were led to believe that selling their souls 
to the Devil meant that they would suffer in Hell for the rest of eternity. This type of ridiculous 
thinking is what the Christian church has used to keep its parishioners in line. Phrases like "God- 
fearing" are indicative of the basis for the Christian religion. It is through such fear that Christianity 
has been able to exist all these years. 

We are no longer supplicating weaklings trembling before an unmerciful "God" who cares not 
whether we live or die. It has been a popular misconception that the Satanist does not believe in 
God. This is not so; but we realize that God, by whatever name he is given - or by no name at all, is 
only the balancing factor in nature and has little concern for any suffering which we may encounter. 
It has been said that the good die young. The good, by Christian standards, do die young. It is the 
frustration of our natural instincts that leads to the premature deterioration of our bodies. 

When one commits a wrong in other religions, he either prays to God for forgiveness or 
confesses to an intermediary and asks him to pray to God for his sins. The Satanist feels that 
confessing to another human being like himself accomplishes nothing and is degrading. When a 
Satanist commits a wrong, he realizes it is natural to make mistakes. If we are truly sorry about 
something, we will learn from our mistakes and not do the same thing again. 

There has been much sensationalism regarding the Satanic Church and its views on free love. 
Free love in the Satanic Church means that a person is free to either be faithful to one person or 
indulge in his sexual desires with as many others as he feels necessary to satisfy his personal needs. 
Satanism advocates any type of sexuality which properly satisfies the person's desires, be it 
hetero sexuality, homosexuality, bisexuality, or even asexuality if you choose - or any of the fetishes 
pertaining to these. To most people masochism represents a rejection of indulgence. We consider 
masochism to be an indulgence if any attempt to sway or change the person from his masochistic 
traits is met with resentment and/or failure. Satanism does not encourage orgiastic activities or 
extramarital affairs for those to whom they do not come naturally. Being unfaithful to one's chosen 
mate would be very unnatural and detrimental to some people. To others it would be frustrating to 
be bound sexually to one person without any hope of outside sexual activity. Each person must 
decide for himself what form of sexual activity best suits his individual needs. To thine own self be 
true. Self-deceit is intolerable in the Satanic religion. 

There are two major holidays in the Satanic religion. These are Walpurgisnacht, which is 
celebrated on April 30th, and Halloween, October 31st. The solstices and equinoxes are also 
celebrated as holidays. On these occasions special rituals are performed, and festivities follow. 



Part II: Ritual Magic 



Ritual magic is a large part of the Satanic religion. The purpose in performing a ritual is to 
accomplish something that, by other means, could not be done. Ritual magic is a very real power. It 
utilizes such tools as hypnosis, telepathy, psychology, etc. The type of magic practiced in the 
Satanic Church is similar to all primitive forms of magic that have been used successfully for 
centuries, but which have been brought into the contemporary world in a workable way that will 
relate to the society in which we live. 

A Satanic ritual is basically an emotional rather than an intellectual performance. For this 
reason certain devices and dramatic effects are used. As in stage magic, the art of misdirection is 
one of the most valuable tools of the ritual magician. By utilizing the following devices the ritual 
magician can temper his intellectual analysis of the ritual. 
Therefore he can allow his emotions free reign. 

A nude female is used as the altar in Satanic rituals because she represents the Earth mother and 
is a natural passive receptor for the workings of magic. The devices used in a Satanic ritual are as 
follows: 

-The Chalice, symbolic of the Chalice of Ecstasy, is to be drunk from first by the Priest, then by one 
assistant. 

-The Bell is used to purify the air at the beginning of the ritual and is used as a pollutionary at the 
end of the ritual. 

-The Phallus is a pagan fertility symbol, the symbol of generation or aggression. It is also a non- 
hypocritical version of the holy water sprinkler of other religions. The Phallus is used to bless the 
congregation. 

- Candles are symbolic of the light of Lucifer - the bearer of light, enlightenment, burning desire, 
and the flames of the pit. Candles should be the only light source during a ritual. 

- The Sword is symbolic of aggressive force, and is used as an extension and intensifier of the arm 
the Priest uses to gesture or point. A parallel to this is the pointing stick or blasting wand used in 
other forms of magical ritual. 

-The Gong is used to call up the Powers of Darkness. 

The male participants in the ritual should wear black robes. Women should wear the most 
sexually appealing clothing possible, or all black for older women. The amulet of Baphomet is 
worn by all participating in the ritual. The color black represents the Powers of Darkness. Sexually 
appealing clothing worn by women is stimulating to the male members and intensifies the 
outpouring of adrenalin energy to ensure a more powerful working. 

During a Satanic ritual it is essential to summon up the strongest emotions that will be 
beneficial to the respective working. The following are examples of this: 

During a compassion ritual it is necessary for the magician to feel honest sympathy and 
compassion for the recipient of his working. It is useless to attempt a ritual of this type if the 
magician cannot truly feel compassion for the person involved. It is all very well and good to tell a 
person that you will perform a compassion ritual for him, but unless you have the necessary deep 
feelings for this person and are sympathetic to his situation, the ritual will not be effective. We 
oftentimes think that we might perform a ritual for a person for whom we really have no concern; 
but it is a sad but true fact of magic that, if we are not intensely concerned for the person, the ritual 
will not work. You should be able to shed an honest tear for this person. If this much emotion 
cannot be felt, it is best not to attempt this type of working. If you are the type of person who 
excuses his inability to do this by thinking "I am not that emotional" or "I've never been able to 
cry", then it is high time you learned how. 

In a hate ritual in which a curse is to be conjured, a strong feeling of contempt for the recipient 
of the curse is mandatory. In a ritual of this sort the more vindictive your curse can be, the more 
powerful your outpouring of hate forces will be. Love is one of the most powerful emotions known 
to man; the other is hate. Without being able to experience one of these emotions, you cannot fully 
experience the other. Therefore you must love those who deserve and return your love, but hate 
your enemies with a whole heart. Half-hearted hatred is very harmful to a person's emotional 
stability. When a person prays for his enemies, he is in reality bottling up his feelings of hatred. He 
still hates the person; but, being bound by the tenets of his religion, he cannot express the hatred he 



feels. To pray for your enemies is to buy second-hand hate, which is of a decidedly inferior quality. 

The harboring of unwarranted guilt is very detrimental. We have been taught to feel guilty for 
all of the things that we most naturally do. Many of us can realize intellectually that it is foolish to 
feel guilty for these natural acts, but to accept this emotionally is another matter. If you cannot 
release yourself from guilt, then you should learn to make it work for you. You should act upon 
your natural instincts and then, realizing that you cannot perform these acts without feeling guilty, 
revel in your guilt. This may sound like a contradiction in terms, but guilt can often add a fillip to 
the senses. Adults would do well to take a lesson from children. Children often take delight in 
doing something they know they are not supposed to. One of the first laws of magic is to turn every 
disadvantage into an advantage. The quickest way of traveling between two points is in a straight 
line. If all the guilts that have been built up can be turned into advantages, then intellectual scraping 
of the psyche - in an attempt to cleanse it of these repressions - is eliminated. Satanism is the only 
religion known to man that accepts this rationale [of turning a bad thing into a good thing] rather 
than that of bending over backwards to eliminate the bad thing. 

The Satanist shuns terms such as hope and prayer, as they are indicative of negative thinking. If 
we hope or pray for something to come about, we will not act in a positive way which will make it 
happen. The Satanist commands, rather than prays to his god. Positive thinking results in positive 
actions. Through positive thinking, combined with ritual, we command the forces of nature. We tell 
ourselves "this will be done, come Hell or high water", and therefore it is done. 

Human beings have personality traits which are either passive or aggressive. Passivity and 
aggressiveness are tamer terms for masochism and sadism. We are all made up of varying degrees 
of these personality types. Some of us lean more towards one or the other, but it is rare to find an 
individual who has equal portions of each of these traits. If a person is basically passive or 
masochistic, he would be most proficient in the mystic or mediumistic side of Satanism. This type 
of person is the most natural psychic or medium. Such persons' very passivity puts them in a 
position of receptivity. 

Since magic is based on positive force, the person who is basically aggressive or sadistic in 
personality traits will do well as a magician. In the field of magic and Satanism, both passive and 
aggressive people are necessary. The aggressive person is best suited for sending forces, and the 
passive or mediumistic person is best utilized as a receptor. Generally a person with a great deal of 
perception is passive. 

It has been the popular misconception that Satanists practice human sacrifice. There has, 
however, never been a clarification of the method used for sacrifice, or of the reasons for which a 
Satanist would resort to this. When we sacrifice a person in a Satanic ritual, we do not slaughter 
him on the altar in a physical manner. We simply direct our hate forces towards the deserving 
recipient. You must never direct a curse toward a person unless you are prepared for the ultimate 
consequences. 

There is no such thing as a mild curse. If a curse is to be effective, you must feel the maximum 
in disdain and hatred for the recipient. By sending these hate forces forth, we ensure suffering on 
the part of the person who has dealt us an injustice. It can only be left to the victim's environmental 
conditions to decide what form our retribution will take, and a measure of the person's rottenness as 
to the degree he will suffer. 

If the recipient of the curse has redeeming qualities of sufficient amounts, then he will not only 
be saved but will be rehabilitated into a more worthwhile person as a result of the curse. Therefore 
you cannot perform a working of this type and specify that you want the person to suffer only a 
broken arm or mild illness. You must realize that death may be the final outcome of a magical 
working of this nature. 

The Satanic Church feels that forcing oneself to feel indiscriminate love for all is very 
unnatural. There has never been any great love movement in the history of the world that has not 
wound up killing countless numbers of people to prove, we must assume, how much they loved 
them. Every hypocrite that ever walked the earth has had pockets bulging with love! You cannot 
love everyone, and by trying to you only lessen your feelings for the people who deserve your love. 
Repressed hate can lead to many physical ailments. For this reason you must periodically perform a 
hate ritual to rid yourself of this bottled-up hate. By choosing a deserving target for your hate 
forces, you cleanse yourself of these malignant emotions and are free to give your loved ones full 



benefit of your emotions without being concerned that you may be, at times, taking your pent-up 
hatred out on them. 

There is a definite period of the day when a person is in a more receptive state than during other 
times. Assuming that the person regularly sleeps for eight hours, the receptive state comes in the 
last two hours or so before awakening. This has been established as the period of time in which the 
person has the dreams he can recall most easily. This is due to the fact that the person's body has 
completed its required rest; but the slow rate of metabolism keeps it dormant for a short time 
afterwards, producing the most receptive time during total sleep. This is when we receive some of 
our most fruitful ideas. It is the twilight period between sleep and waking. A person's subconscious 
is at its most active point during this period of time. It is during this period that a telepathic 
communication would have the best chance of being received. To be most effective, therefore, your 
magical working should be performed during this twilight period. 

There are many herbs and spices which are used in ritual magic. The most common ingredient 
used in love potions is mandrake root. Just as most acts which are considered evil are within the 
law, so some of the most effective ingredients used in potions can be legally obtained. There is no 
need to resort to popular and/or illegal drugs for any magical purpose. 

The magical language used in Satanic ritual is Enochian. Enochian is a language which is 
thought to be older than Sanskrit, with a sound grammatical and syntactical basis. It was developed 
into a practical translation, which is its current form, by Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers. In 
Enochian the meaning of the words, combined with the quality of the words, unite to create a 
pattern of sound which can cause tremendous reaction in the atmosphere. The barbaric tonal 
qualities of this language give it a truly magical effect which cannot be described. 

It is thought by most that all Satanic rituals are in the form of the Black Mass. This is a 
misconception. Most Satanic rituals have nothing in them which would be considered sacrilegious 
to another religion. One of the reasons a Black Mass would be performed in the Satanic Church 
would be to remove a stigma attached to the activities of one or several members. If a person feels 
bound or stifled by a previous religion, a Black Mass would be performed to enable him to 
completely divorce himself from the limiting factors of that past religion. 

A Black Mass consists of such things as saying the Lord's Prayer backwards -interspersed with 
obscenities, trampling the cross underfoot or hanging it upside-down, desecration of the wafer or 
host, and similar forms of defilement or parody of the sacred cows which make the religion a threat 
to the person involved. By reducing the awesomeness of the religion to ridiculousness, we remove 
its fearsomeness. 

The only other circumstance in which a Black Mass would be performed would be one in which 
another religion had directly attacked the Satanic Church. To perform a Black Mass just for its 
shock value would serve no useful purpose. The Christian religion is no threat to the Satanist. One 
might say that the Devil has kept all the religions on earth in business for many, many years. If it 
were not for these religions which he has allowed to flourish, Satan could not come forth now and 
establish his organized church, built on the very episcopacy and structure of the existing religions. 

Satanism is taken up by most people not out of protest, but out of logic. Therefore the 
debasement of their previous religions is unnecessary. There are many sacred cows in our current 
society which warrant protest as much if not more than the Christian religion. A modern-day form 
of the Black Mass might consist of such things as urinating on marijuana, crushing an LSD sugar 
cube under foot, hanging a picture of Timothy Leary or a famous Indian guru upside-down, 
exposing the parallel between the Hippie generation and the "emperor's new clothes." These things 
would be far more effective to the magical workings of a Satanist than a typical Black Mass. 

The results of a magical working will start to manifest themselves within thirty-six hours from 
the time the ritual was performed. Once the magical working has been performed, you must push 
all thoughts of hope or anxiety from your mind. You have released your emotions and sent them out 
into the ether, where they can effect your desired results. After this there is nothing left to do but sit 
back and wait for the results. Anxiety only acts to lessen the effectiveness of your working. 

The Satanic ritual is not always confined to sinister or occult surroundings. The true magician is 
adept at turning any situation he encounters into a magical working. He can manipulate his 
surroundings to his best advantage. 

A ritual which is performed for the sake of reducing an awesome figure to a ridiculous state is 



called a Shibboleth ritual. In this type of ritual each of the participants chooses a pillar of society or 
a type of person who is particularly awesome or irritating to him. Each then dresses in the costume 
of the chosen victim. For about an hour all participants communicate with one another, all the while 
acting out in parody what would be the actions of the persons portrayed. 

After this psychodrama has been performed, a sort of kangaroo court is held, and the person 
acting as Priest for the ritual takes the role of Satan. In the form of Satan he questions each person 
individually. Each participant answers Satan's questions in the manner in which his chosen 
character would answer them. Through the favorite tools of the Devil, wile and guile, Satan exposes 
the character for what he is. He talks him into selling his soul to the Devil, utilizing things which 
are sacred cows to the shibboleth for the purpose of disguising his tactics. 

In a ritual such as this, the purpose is to ridicule the shibboleth. In this way he will no longer be 
awesome to the person who has suffered in some way by his actions. The situation in which the 
Satanist comes in contact with the shibboleth may be one in which he is forced to treat him in a 
civil or even respectful manner, but once the ritual has been performed, the Satanist can laugh up 
his sleeve at the person. The shibboleth will sense that he is being patronized and will no longer 
feel that he is capable of wielding the power that he once did over the Satanist. 

Part III: Magic as Practiced by the Satanic Church 

There are many facets of magic that can be learned only through experience. A magus is one 
who has become adept in the field of ritual magic. There are many scholars of magic who are not 
capable of putting the theories which they have learned into practice. Others may have very little 
formal training in magic but may have a natural ability to utilize the Powers of Darkness. 
Knowledge can be a powerful tool, but without the common sense to put this knowledge into 
practice, it is useless. Animals and small children are the most natural magicians. They have had 
little or no formal training and yet are adept at bending people and situations to their will. The 
Satanist regards these small beings as sacred and realizes that he can learn much from them. 

The Satanic Church is different from all other witchcraft or magical groups in the world today. 
It is unlike the white magical groups, such as those in which the powers of magic are supposedly 
used only for altruistic purposes. Nor is it a primitive group of cannibals whose membership is 
made up of uneducated people. The Satanic Church is the first organization of its kind whose 
membership consists largely of responsible, respectable people. Only by limiting our membership 
to individuals of this variety, rather than appealing to the lunatic fringe, can we be certain of 
becoming the strongest power structure in the world. Therefore membership in the Satanic Church 
is not open to everyone. Unlike other religions in which you go to church to become a worthwhile 
person, in the Satanic religion you must be a worthy person before you can come into church. Once 
in the Church, you can reap the rewards which you deserve. The Satanic Church has too much to 
offer to afford membership to people who are only seeking sensationalism or are of a personality 
makeup that would reflect upon the Satanic religion in an unfavorable way. 

The Satanic Church looks with disdain upon white witchcraft groups, as we feel that altruism is 
sinning on the lay-away plan. It is unnatural not to have the desire to gain things for yourself. This 
does not mean that you never do anything for anyone else. If you do something to make someone 
for whom you care happy, his happiness will give you a sense of gratification. We practice a 
modified form of the Golden Rule. Our interpretation of this rule is: "Do unto others as they do 
unto you." If you "do unto others as you would have them do unto you" and they in turn treat you 
badly, it goes against human nature to continue to treat such people with consideration. You may do 
unto others as you would have them do unto you; but if your kindness is not returned, they should 
be treated with the wrath they deserve. 

White witchcraft groups spout the theory that, if you curse a person, it will "return to you three- 
fold", "come home to roost," or in some way "boomerang back to the curser." This is yet another 
indication of the guilt-ridden philosophy held by these neo-pagan, pseudo-Christian groups. These 
people want to delve into witchcraft but cannot divorce themselves from the stigma attached to it. 
Therefore they call themselves white magicians and base seventy-five percent of their philosophy 
on the trite and hackneyed tenets of Christianity. 

Anyone who pretends to be interested in magic for reasons other than gaining personal power is 



the worst kind of hypocrite. The Satanic Church respects Christianity at least for being consistent in 
its guilt-ridden philosophy, but it can only feel contempt for people who attempt to appear 
emancipated from guilt by joining a witchcraft group and then practice the same basic philosophy 
as Christianity. White magic is supposedly only utilized for good or unselfish purposes; and black 
magic, we are told, is used only for selfish reasons. In the Satanic Church we draw no dividing line 
between white or black magic. Magic is magic, be it used to help or hinder. You the magician 
should have the ability to decide what is just and then apply the powers of magic to attain your 
goals. 

The Satanic Church combines two very paradoxical words in its title. There is a definite reason 
for this. The word "church" is a respected and revered term. To combine the word "church" with 
the outrageousness of Satan is to employ one of the most important magical formulas - the 
utilization of nine parts acceptability to one part outrageousness. To be a true magician you must, in 
all outward appearances, be acceptable to the establishment - and then use outrageous methods to 
undermine a situation. This again involves the art of misdirection. 

If you have an appearance of respectability and then present an unorthodox idea, it will be 
accepted much more readily than it would be if you present an appearance which does not conform 
to the average person's image of respectability. For example, five thousand people marching down 
the street dressed in outlandish costumes and wearing the badges of antagonism will only succeed 
in alienating themselves more strongly from the forces they desire to change. If these marchers 
would appear in the guise of those whom they would change, then the needed identification could 
be established and inroads gained. 

Human beings are very egotistical creatures. We will be much more receptive to a new idea if it 
is presented to us by someone who is for the most part like ourselves than we would be if it were 
presented by a person completely alien to us. Only by working side by side with the establishment 
can we create any sizable change in our society. Satanism is the only religion in which a person can 
"turn on" to the pleasures around him without "dropping out" of society. By "dropping out" we 
would only deprive ourselves of the enjoyable things that society has to offer. We would also limit 
the situations in which we could perform our magical workings. 

Our Christianized society cannot deny the existence of Satan, for to do so would require it to 
deny the existence of God. For that matter any attempt on the part of any religion to deny the 
existence of Satan, by whatever name he is called, would be to deny the contents of its respective 
scriptures. 



The Command to Look 

Stephen E. Flowers, Ph.D., V° Temple of Set 

1 

Reprinted from Runes #IV-3, Order of the Trapezoid, 1986 

In the Charter of the Order of the Trapezoid, I read that one of Anton LaVey's primal source 
works for the principles underlying the Law of the Trapezoid and hence the Order itself, was a book 
by William Mortensen: The Command to Look. I had never seen nor heard of this book before, so I 
set out to find it. I was on the track of the Trapezoid, which is sometimes an elusive trail. As I 
began looking, I soon discovered that The Command to Look was no arcane Black Book, but 
appeared in the University of Texas card catalog as a book on photographic techniques. My interest 
waned slightly. Besides, the only copy was in the Humanities Research Center, which is also home 
to much of Aleister Crowley's personal library. That always means red tape. I put off my quest for 
a few weeks. 

Weeks turned into months before I moved myself to take up the trail again. After finding the 
right collection on the right floor, and after sitting through the required slide show on how to handle 
rare items in the collection. After the librarian asked "Are you sure you want to do this?", I knew I 
was on to something. 

I was shown to a private reading room where I finally got the book - presumably dug out of 
some unseen vault. It was laid before me in a plexiglass "cradle", which is to prevent damage to the 
tome. What did I see? There on the cover of a small book, I was confronted by the face of a baby 
looking like a refugee from a Norman Rockwell painting. The librarian sarcastically remarked, 
"Looks real interesting !" 

Since I had gone that far, I opened the book, I did not now expect much. But I was very much 
surprised. The Command to Look is indeed a treasure trove of the Black Art, and the ideas 
contained in it should be made available to the Order not only on historical grounds, but also on the 
basis of their practical magical value. 

Theory 

Mortensen insists that the main premise of the Command to Look (CTL) is closer to pure 
showmanship than anything else. The formula is threefold: 

(1) The picture must, by its mere arrangement, make you look at it (impact) 

(2) and, having looked, see! (subject interest) 

(3) and, having seen, enjoy [(participation) 

All three of these elements must be fully activated before the artist - or magician -can be said to 
have successfully "commanded to look". All three, however, work in such rapid succession that it is 
almost always effected unconsciously with regard to the viewer. Therefore the artist must carefully 
formulate his images to work efficiently in all three elements. 

The first element - impact - is psychically coercive. Its function is entirely one of the shapes or 
patterns the viewer sees. It forces the viewer to pay attention to the image. This initial force, which 
Mortensen calls "the pictorial imperative", is the force necessary to overcome the natural inertia of 
attention which holds most humans in a more or less constant grip. 

According to Mortensen, impact is purely biological in effect. It is primarily dependent on 
shapes or patterns that serve as stimuli signaling danger. These fear-arousing patterns must have 
their psychic models stored in the forms within the "racial memory" or, to use the Jungian term, 
"collective unconscious" of humanity. 



i 

This essay is also contained in Black Runa, a collection of Dr. Flowers' writings for the Order of the Trapezoid, 
published by Runa-Raven Press, P.O. Box 557, Smithville, Texas 78957. 



Mortensen identifies four basic types of pictorial patterns that have the ability to cause this reaction: 

1 The diagonal, e.g. the lightning bolt = something that moves swiftly with determination 

2 The S-curve, e.g. the snake (something that approaches in a slithering fashion) or the 
curves of the body (especially female = "the line of beauty") 

3 Triangle combinations, e.g. a blade, sharp points, or teeth (= the threat of sharpness) 

4 Compact dominant mass, e.g. large animal or trapezoid (= massive block in one's path) 

Again it can not be overemphasized that these patterns are purely formal and have nothing to do 
with the dominant themes of the images. For example, if one drew the outlines of the basic 
contrasts in a black and white photograph and examined them in a purely geometrical way, the 
"pictorial pattern" would be obvious. More than one category of pictorial patterning can be present 
in any given representation as well. 

The second element -subject interest -must now be able to "deliver" what the successful 
application of the pictorial imperative has promised. Many images, or magicians, may command to 
look, and then be quite unable to hold the attention they have attracted. 

This is done through the actual subject of the image, moving from the external form to the 
internal essence of the thing. According to Mortensen, in order to hold the attention -in order to 
make the viewer see - he or she must at once be able to recognize something basically and 
essentially compelling about the subject. 

For all practical purposes, this recognition must occur simultaneously with the impact. 
Therefore the types of subject interests must have as broad an emotional appeal as possible. 

Mortensen cites the great showman, Cecil B. De Mille, as saying that the formula for box office 
success is to have a film dealing with sex, sentiment, religion, and sport. Mortensen reduces this 
somewhat to three subject themes: sex, sentiment, and wonder. It is Mortensen' s contention that 
their compelling nature make them the most effective imagematic themes in the CTL. 

The sex-theme seems to dominate; it certainly does in Mortensen' s own work. In commenting 
on the gender of the subject of the sex-theme image, Mortensen says: "It is interesting to note that 
women are just as much attracted to the theme of sex when presented in the form of the female 
nude as men are. Their attraction in this case is vicarious, rather than direct. Their pleasure comes 
in imagining themselves placed in a situation where they would receive the same admiration that 
goes out to the theme of the picture." (p. 37) 

The sentiment-theme is usually effected through the softer aspects of sex, children, hardships of 
humble life, domestic life, animals, landscapes, national pride, glamour of the past, etc. 

The wonder-theme is quite broad and covers the areas of unknown, uncertain, mysterious 
things, as well as themes of the supernatural, the macabre, etc. 

Themes can, of course, be effectively mixed. Some permutations, such as "sex + wonder", 
might be more immediately effective than "sex + sentiment", but as with all forms of 
communication, it would seem that knowledge of one's potential "target audience" is the essential 
variable. 

It should be obvious that the effective use of the CTL is largely dependent upon the aesthetic 
compatibility of the nature of the impact pattern and subject matter. Interesting mixtures are also 
possible here. 

The third element of the CTL-formula is participation, the element that causes the looker to 
experience -and thereby enjoy -what he or she is seeing. This is done, according to Mortensen, by 
drawing the viewer's attention into the image by means of lines -geometrical alignments - that 
cause a movement of those attention patterns in accordance with the impact and subject matter of 
the image. 

Mortensen comments that the eye of the looker will naturally move along contours and outlines, 
and that such geometrical guides should be provided by the image-maker in ways compatible with 
the impact lines and the subject matter. This is what he would call "confirming forms". 

The image-maker must, with this third element, confirm the promised subject matter after 
having "commanded to look" in the first place with an almost pure "shock element". 



Practice 



There are at least three ways to apply the principles of the CTL (1) in the creation of graphic or 
spatial images (e.g. photographs, drawings, paintings, rooms, chambers, etc.), (2) in Lesser Black 
Magic, and (3) in Greater Black Magic. 

The first application is obvious and primarily what Mortensen had in mind. The work of 
Edward T. Hall, e.g. The Hidden Dimension, is a valuable supplement to the CTL in this regard. Of 
course the design of a Trapezoidal Working Chamber could not ignore these principles either. 

In reading Mortensen' s book the Black Magician probably could not escape the feeling that 
these principles could be applied outside the context of the graphic or spatial arts. 

If indeed these principles are "biological" or part of the "racial memory", could they not be 
employed when the Black Magician considers how to present himself or herself when working 
Lesser Black Magic? It seems that the CTL contains a comprehensive theory on how to get - and 
hold - the attention of someone on an unconscious level. What, then, the Black Magician does with 
that attention is another matter. When one looks around, however, it is clear that the CTL is being 
employed by a variety of individuals, both consciously and unconsciously, all the time. 

Finally the CTL can be used in Greater Black Magic. The Black Magician can use its principles 
to impress more effective images within the subjective universe and thereby have a greater or 
deeper effect in the objective universe. Also any objective manifestation of this process - in an 
objective image constructed according to CTL principles -will be a more powerful tool in effecting 
Greater Black Magic. 

This is where the Law of the Trapezoid comes in. If we analyze the Seal of the Order, we will 
see a (Grand) Masterful application of CTL principles: the "swiftly moving diagonal" at its center 
(the head of the tcham-scepter), the "threat of sharpness" throughout (note especially the 
interlockings of the numerals with the angles of the pentagram and the "W" at its nether point), and 
the "dominant mass" implicit in the trapezoid itself. 

The Black Magical applications of the CTL seem virtually boundless, and it is to the credit of 
Anton Szandor LaVey, first Grand Master of the Order of the Trapezoid, and perhaps the greatest 
magical genius of this century, that he was first able to extract the practical magical applications 
from Mortensen' s aesthetic theories. 



"The Book of Satan" from the Satanic Bible 

Comparison with Ragnar Redbeard's (Arthur Desmond), Might is Right, 1896 
Michael A. Aquino 

The following extracts are verbatim from Might is Right, and have been arranged in the same order 
as in the "Book of Satan" section of the Satanic Bible. The items in brackets were added by Anton 
LaVey in the places indicated. 

I. 

In this arid wilderness of steel and stone, I raise up my voice that you may hear. To the East and 
to the West I beckon. To the North and to the South I show a sign proclaiming: Death to the 
weakling, wealth to the strong! 

Open your eyes that you may see, O men of mildewed minds; and listen to me, ye laborious 
millions ! 

For I stand forth to challenge the wisdom of the world -to interrogate the "laws" of man and of 
"God". 

I request reasons for your golden rule, and ask the why and wherefore of your Ten Commands. 
Before none of your printed idols do I bend in acquiescence, and he who saith "thou shalt" to 
me is my mortal foe. 

I demand proof over all things and accept with reservations even that which is true. 

I dip my forefinger in the watery blood of your impotent, mad redeemer and write over his 
thorn-torn brow: The true prince of evil - the king of the slaves. 

No hoary falsehood shall be a truth to me; no cult or dogma shall encramp my pen. 

I break away from all conventions [that do not lead to my earthly success and happiness]. 
Alone, untrammeled. I raise up in stern invasion the standard of the strong. 

I gaze into the glassy eye of your fearsome Jehovah and pluck him by the beard; I uplift a 
broad-axe and split open his worm-eaten skull. 

I blast out the ghastly contents of philosophic whited sepulchers and laugh with sardonic wrath! 

Then, reaching up the festering and varnished facades of your haughtiest moral dogmas, I write 
thereon in letters of blazing scorn: "Lo and behold, all this is fraud!" 

I deny all things! I question all things! 

And yet! And yet! 

Gather around me, O ye death-defiant, and the Earth itself shall be thine, to have and to hold. 

n. 

Behold the crucifix; what does it symbolize? Pallid incompetence hanging on a tree. 

All ethics, politics, and philosophies are pure assumptions, built upon assumptions. They rest on 
no sure basis. They are but shadowy castles-in-the-air erected by day-dreamers, or by rogues, upon 
nursery fables. It is time they were firmly planted upon an enduring foundation. This can never be 
accomplished until the racial mind has first been thoroughly cleansed and drastically disinfected of 
its depraved, alien, and demoralizing concepts of right and wrong. In no human brain can sufficient 
space be found for the relentless logic of hard fact, until all pre-existing delusions have been finally 
annihilated. Half-measures are of no avail; we must go down to the very roots and tear them out, 
even to the last fibre. We must be, like nature, hard, cruel, relentless. 

Too long the dead hand has been permitted to sterilize living thought. Too long right and 
wrong, good and evil have been inverted by false prophets. In the days that are at hand, neither 
creed nor code must be accepted upon authority - human, superhuman, or "divine". Morality and 
conventionalism are for subordinates. Religions and constitutions and all arbitrary principles, every 
mortal theorem, must be deliberately put to the question. No moral dogma must be taken for 
granted, no standard of measurement deified. There is nothing inherently sacred about moral codes. 
Like the wooden idols of long ago, they are all the work of human hands; and what man has made, 
man can destroy. 



He who is slow to believe anything and everything is of great understanding, for belief in one 
false principle is the beginning of all unwisdom. The chief duty of every new age is to upraise new 
men to determine its liberties, to lead it towards material success - to rend the rusty padlocks and 
chains of dead custom that always prevent healthy expansion. Theories and ideals and constitutions 
that may have meant life, hope, and freedom for our ancestors may now mean destruction, slavery, 
and dishonor to us. As environments change, no human ideal standeth sure. 

Whenever, therefore, a lie has built unto itself a throne, let it be assailed without pity and 
without regret; for under the dominance of an inconvenient falsehood, no nation can permanently 
prosper. Let established sophisms be dethroned, rooted out, burnt, and destroyed -for they are a 
standing menace to all true nobility of thought and action. Whatever alleged "truth" is proven by 
results to be but an empty fiction, let it be unceremoniously flung into the outer darkness, among 
the dead gods, dead empires, dead philosophies, and other useless lumber and wreckage. 

The most dangerous of all enthroned lies is the holy, the sanctified, the privileged lie -the lie 
that everyone believes to be a model truth. It is the fruitful mother of all other popular errors and 
delusions. It is a hydra- headed. It has a thousand roots. It is a social cancer. The lie that is known to 
be a lie is half-eradicated. But the lie that even intelligent persons regard as a sacred fact - the lie 
that has been inculcated around a mother's knee -is more dangerous to contend against than a 
creeping pestilence. Popular lies have ever been the most potent enemies of personal liberty. There 
is only one way to deal with them: Cut them out, to the very core, just as cancers are. Exterminate 
them root and branch, or they will surely eat us all up. Annihilate them, or they will us. Half and 
half remedies are of no avail. 

However, when a lie has gone too far - when it has taken up its abode in the very tissues, bones, 
and brains of a people, then all remedies are useless. Even the lancet is of no avail. Repentance of 
past misdeeds cannot "save" decadents from extermination. The fatal bolt is shot, and into the fiery 
furnace of wholesale slavery they must go, to be there righteously consumed. From their ashes 
something new, something nobler, may possibly evolve; but even that is the merest optimistic 
supposition. 

In nature the wages of sin are always death. Nature does not love the wrong-doer, but 
endeavors in every way to destroy him. Her curse is on the brow of the "meek and lowly". Her 
blessing is on the very heart's blood of the strong and the brave. Only Jews and Christs and other 
degenerates think that rejuvenation can ever come through law and prayer. "All the tears of the 
martyrs" might just as well have never been shed. 

III. 

"Love one another", you say, is the supreme law. But what power has made it so? Upon what 
rational authority does the gospel of love rest? Is it even possible of practice, and what would result 
from its universal application to active affairs? Why should I not hate mine enemies and hunt them 
down like the wild beasts they are? If I "love" them, does that not place me at their mercy? Is it 
natural for enemies to "do good" unto each other? And what is "good"? Can the torn and bloody 
victim "love" the blood-splashed jaws that rend him limb from limb? Are we not all predatory 
animals by instinct? If humans ceased wholly from preying upon each other, could they continue to 
exist? 

[Is not "lust and carnal desire" a more truthful term to describe "love" when applied to the 
continuance of the race? Is not the "love" of the fawning scriptures simply a euphemism for sexual 
activity, or was the "great teacher" a glorifier of eunuchs?] 

"Love your enemies and do good to them that hate you and despitefully use you" is the 
despicable philosophy of the spaniel that rolls upon its back when kicked. Obey it, O reader, and 
you and your posterity to the tenth generation shall be irretrievably and literally damned. They shall 
be hewers of wood and carriers of water: degenerates, Gibeonites. But hate your enemies with a 
whole heart. If a man smite you on one cheek, smash him down! Smite him hip and thigh, for self- 
preservation is the highest law. 

He who turns the other cheek is a cowardly dog - a Christian dog. 

Give him blow for blow, scorn for scorn, doom for doom -with compound interest liberally 
added thereunto! Eye for eye, tooth for tooth -aye, four-fold, a hundred-fold! Make yourself a 



Terror to your adversary; and when he goeth his way, he will possess much additional wisdom to 
ruminate over. Thus shall you make yourself respected in all the walks of life, and your spirit - your 
immortal spirit - shall live: not in an intangible paradise, but in the brains and thews of your 
aggressive and unconquerable sons. After all, the true proof of manhood is a splendid progeny; and 
it is a scientific axiom that the timid animal transmits timidity to its descendants. 

If men lived "like brothers" and had no powerful enemies to contend with and surpass, they 
would rapidly lose all their best qualities - like certain oceanic birds that lose the use of their wings 
because they do not have to fly from pursuing beasts of prey. If all men had treated each other with 
brotherly love since the beginning, what would have been the result now? If there had been no 
wars, no rivalry, no competition, no kingship, no slavery, no survival of the toughest, no racial 
extermination, truly what a festering "hell fenced in" this old globe would be! 

IV. 

If this struggle is ordained of us, why not enter into it with kindly courage, with dauntless 
delight? Why not go forward daring all things, to conquer or to die? 

Is it not better to perish than to serve? "Liberty or death" is not a meaningless phrase. No, it is 
of tremendous import to those who - comprehend. 

What is death that it should make cowards of us all? What is life that it should be values so 
highly? There are worse things than death, and among them is a life of dishonor. All men lead 
dishonorable lives who serve a master with hand or brain. 

Life itself is but a spark in the gloom that flashes out and disappears [1]. Why therefore not 
make the most of it here and now - here and now! 

There is no "Heaven of glory bright", and no Hell where sinners roast. There is no Right; there 
is no Wrong - nor God - nor Son - nor Ghost. 

Death endeth all for every man. 
For every "son of thunder": 
Then be a Lion in the path, 

And don't be trampled under. 

For us there is no rest -no Kingdom of Indolence, either on this Earth or beyond the skies -no 
Isles of the Blest - no Elysian Fields - no garden of the Hesperides. No! No! All these magical 
legends are but fanciful waking dreams - fiction of mortals of yore. 

Here and now is our day of torment! Here and now is our day of joy! Here and now is our 
opportunity! Choose ye this day, this hour, for no Redeemer liveth. 

Every attempt made to organize the future must necessarily collapse. The present is our domain, 
and our chief duty is to take immediate possession thereof upon strict business principles. 

Strive therefore against them that strive against you, and war against them that war against 
thine. Lay hold of shield and buckler or their equivalents; stand up! Be a terrible one in thine own 
defense. Raise up also the clenched hand, and stop the way of them that would persecute you. Say 
unto thine own heart and soul: "I, even I, am my own redeemer." 

Let them be hurled back to confusion and infamy, who devise thine undoing. Let them be as 
chaff before the cyclone, and let the Angel of Death pursue them, nay, overtake them. In a pit they 
have hidden a trap for thy feet; into that very destruction let them fall. Then, exultant, "sound the 
loud timbrel". Rejoice! Rejoice! in thine own salvation. Then all thy bones shall say pridefully, 
"Who is like unto me? Have I not delivered myself by mine own brain? Have I not been too strong 
for mine adversaries? Have I not spoiled them that would have spoiled me?" 

V. 

Blessed are the strong, for they shall possess the Earth. Cursed are the weak, for they shall inherit 
the yoke. 

Blessed are the powerful, for they shall be reverenced among men. Cursed are the feeble, for they 
shall be blotted out. 



Blessed are the bold, for they shall be masters of the world. 

Cursed are the [righteously] humble, for they shall be trodden under [cloven] hoofs. 
Blessed are the victorious, for victory is the basis of right. 
Cursed are the vanquished, for they shall be vassals forever. 

Blessed are the battle-blooded. Beauty shall smile upon them. Cursed are the poor in spirit, for they 
shall be spat upon. 

Blessed are the audacious, for they have imbibed true wisdom. Cursed are the obedient, for they 
shall breed creeplings. 

Blessed are the iron-handed; the unfit shall flee before them. Cursed are the haters of battle; 
subjugation is their portion. 

Blessed are the death-defiant; their days shall be long in the land. 
Cursed are the feeble-brained [2], for they shall perish amidst plenty. 

Blessed are the destroyers of false hope; they are the true Messiahs. 
Cursed are the God-adorers; they shall be shorn sheep! 

Blessed are the valiant, for they shall obtain great treasure. 

Cursed are the believers in Good and Evil, for they are frightened by shadows. 

Blessed are those who believe in Nothing [3]; never shall it terrorize their minds. 
Cursed are the "lambs of God"; they shall be bled "whiter than snow." 

Blessed is the man who has powerful enemies [4]; they shall make him a hero. 
Cursed is he who "doeth good" unto others [5]; he shall be despised. 

Blessed the man whose foot is swift to serve a friend; he is a friend indeed. 
Cursed are the organizers of charities; they are propagators of plagues. 

Blessed are the wise and brave, for in the struggle they shall win. 
Cursed are the unfit, for they shall be righteously exterminated. 

Blessed are the sires of noble maidens; they are the salt of the earth. 
Cursed the mothers of strumous tenderlings, for they shall be shamed. 

Blessed are the mighty-minded, for they shall ride the whirlwinds. 

Cursed are they who teach lies for truth and truth for lies, for they are - abomination. 

Blessed are the unmerciful; their posterity shall own the world. Cursed are the famous wiselings; 
their seed shall perish off the Earth. 

Thrice cursed are the vile [6], for they shall serve and suffer. 

[The angel of self-deceit is camped in the souls of the "righteous".] 

[The eternal flame of power through joy dwelleth within the flesh of the Satanist!] 



* * * 



[1] Life is the great indulgence - death the great abstinence. 

[2] Cursed are the gazers toward a richer life beyond the grave, 

[3] Blessed are those who believe in what is best for them; 

[4] Blessed is the man who has a sprinkling of enemies; 

[5] Cursed is he who doeth good unto others who sneer upon him in return; 

[6] Thrice cursed are the weak whose insecurity makes them vile, 



The Hidden Source of the Satanic Philosophy 

George C. Smith 11° in The Scroll of Set #XIII-3, June XXII/1987 



Reading through past issues of the Scroll of Set, I came across a statement by Susan Wylie 
(March/ April XVI: "The Devil's Game"): "One should remember that, prior to I JES, there had 
never been any organization or belief structure similar to the Church of Satan." Although this was 
written several years ago, I must reach across the years and address this serious error. The 
implications for those of us in the Temple today are no less severe. 

"I know that I am challenging the cultural tradition of two and a half thousand years." 

The speaker was not Anton LaVey. The speaker was a novelist, playwright, and philosopher, 
Ayn Rand. From the springboard of her famous, bestselling novels (The Fountainhead in 1943 and 
Atlas Shrugged in 1957) was created the philosophy of Objectivism, which attracted thousands of 
persons - myself included - who were more than "openly honest regarding what they believed" but 
studied, wrote, taught, and practiced what they held to be the highest expression of living. 

Although like others I now have some obvious points of philosophical disagreement with 
Objectivism, the legacy of this enormous Satanic break with the past remains a fact of history that 
is of prime importance to Setians everywhere. To imply or state that the Church of Satan was the 
first to clearly state the Satanic ethic is to ignore the continuing impact of Ayn Rand and 
individualists influenced by her work such as Nathaniel Branden [The Psychology of Self -Esteem 
and Honoring the Self] and Harry Browne [How I Found Freedom in an Unfree World]. It would 
instead benefit us to enrich our understanding of what the Gift of Set has meant and does mean to 
others who preceded I JES. 

To illustrate this historical precedent, let us examine the Nine Satanic Statements in view of the 
Rand work Atlas Shrugged. In Gait's speech (pages #936-993) is the written source of most of the 
philosophical ideas expressed in the Satanic Bible. Here are the first clear, contemporary statements 
which led to the glorification of man's pride and the denouncing of the life-killing concept called 
altruism. Here also is a vindication of rationality and the inevitable cause of the failure of the 
Church of Satan to encompass the needs of intelligent and curious minds. 

Note that the sequential order of these Atlas Shrugged quotations parallels the order of the Nine 
Satanic Statements. 

1. LaVey: Satan represents indulgence instead of abstinence. 

Rand: A doctrine that gives you, as an ideal, the role of a sacrificial animal seeking slaughter on the 
altars of others, is giving you death as your standard. By the grace of reality and the nature of life, 
man - every man - is an end in himself. He exists for his own sake, and the achievement of his own 
happiness is his highest moral purpose, (page 940) 

2. LaVey: Satan represents vital existence instead of spiritual pipe dreams. 

Rand: My morality, the morality of reason, is contained in a single axiom: existence exists - and in 
a single choice: to live. The rest proceeds from these, (page 944) 

3. LaVey: Satan represents undefiled wisdom instead of hypocritical self-deceit. 

Rand: Honesty is not a social duty, not a sacrifice for the sake of others, but the most profoundly 
selfish virtue man can practice: his refusal to sacrifice the reality of his own existence to the 
deluded consciousness of others, (page 945) 

4. LaVey: Satan represents kindness to those who deserve it instead of love wasted on ingrates. 
Rand: To withhold your contempt from men's vices is an act of moral counterfeiting, and to 
withhold your admiration from their virtues is an act of moral embezzlement, (page 946) 

5. LaVey: Satan represents vengeance instead of turning the other cheek. 

Rand: When a man attempts to deal with me by force, I answer him by force, (page 950) 



6. LaVey: Satan represents responsibility to the responsible instead of concern for psychic 
vampires. 

Rand: You have been using fear as your weapon, and have been bringing death to man as his 
punishment for rejecting your morality. We offer him life as his reward for accepting ours, (page 
950) 

7. LaVey: Satan represents man as just another animal - sometimes better, more often worse than 
those that walk on all-fours -who, because of his "divine spiritual and intellectual development", 
has become the most vicious animal of all. 

Rand: Damnation is the start of your morality; destruction is its purpose, means, and end. Your code 
begins by damning man as evil, then demands that he practice a good which it defines as impossible 
for him to practice. It demands, as his first proof of virtue, that he accept his own depravity without 
proof. It demands that he start not with a standard of value but with a standard of evil, which is 
himself, by means of which he is then to define the good; the good is that which he is not. (page 
951) 

8. LaVey: Satan represents all of the so-called sins, as they all lead to physical, mental, or 
emotional gratification. 

Rand: What is the nature of the guilt that your teachers call his Original Sin? What are the evils 
man acquired when he fell from a state they consider perfection? Their myth declares that he ate the 
fruit of the tree of knowledge - he acquired a mind and became a rational being. It was the 
knowledge of good and evil; he became a moral being. He was sentenced to earn his bread by his 
labor; he became a productive being. He was sentenced to experience desire; he acquired the 
capacity of sexual enjoyment. The evils for which they damn him are reason, morality, 
creativeness, joy - all the cardinal values of his existence, (page 951) 

9. LaVey: Satan has been the best friend the church has ever had, as he has kept it in business all 
these years. 

Rand: And as he now crawls through the wreckage, groping blindly for a way to live, your teachers 
offer him the help of a morality that proclaims that he'll find no solution and must seek no 
fulfillment on Earth. Real existence, they tell him, is that which he cannot perceive, true 
consciousness is the faculty of perceiving the non-existent - and if he is unable to understand it, 
that is the proof that his existence is evil and his consciousness impotent, (page 952) 

I think that most careful examinations of the Satanic Bible will show how the Nine Satanic 
Statements acted as an outline for the "Book of Lucifer" essays. 

Anton LaVey is the Magus of the Age of Satan, and did Utter a Word and cause a magical 
restructuring of the universe. As the instrument of the creation of that Age, he is immortalized. At 
the same time, credit for the source of the philosophy which he espoused must be given to Ayn 
Rand. 

Please understand that I was an Objectivist prior to joining the Church of Satan. It was the 
intellectual rigor demanded by Objectivism which enabled me to appreciate the full meaning of the 
Satanic Bible. At the same time I first completed reading it, I said that here I had found Objectivism 
with an open mind concerning paranormal phenomena. 

The importance of all this to Setians is that the foundation for the philosophy of Satanism much 
more closely embraces the philosophy of the Temple of Set than the reactionary, anti-Christian 
Church of Satan. Further the Objectivist source for the Satanic philosophy has been carefully 
researched and elaborated [sometimes refuted in part] in numerous libertarian books and articles. 

To my mind, what distinguished the Temple of Set from all other organizations is its non- 
dogmatic embracing of both the rational and the intuitive, while refusing to allow the rational to be 
undercut. Those who worked with the "unevolved" Church of Satan prior to X JES should know 
that battles were being waged in open forums against the anti-human forces of altruism in the name 
of reason prior to I JES. These heroic efforts should not be forgotten or ignored, but should be 
examined for additional aids along our path to Xeper. 



Photo Gallery 




Colophon 



The Satanic Bible (Underground Edition) 

Version 1.00, Hallowe'en 2006 e.v. /XLI A.S. 



Version History 

1.00 - Initial Release 

Notes 

• The core scanned book text may be from a British edition; so there might be some alternate 
spellings compared to the original American edition 

• The book cover scans are from an Avon first edition of the work 




"The more I study religions, the more I am convinced 
that man never worshipped anything but himself. " 



-Sir Richard F. Burton, explorer (1812-1890) 
